

===== PAGE 1 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
1 
What this chapter is about……………………..…………………………..…….... 
  3 
2 
Program objectives…………………………………………………………………. 
  3 
3 
The Act and Regulations…………………………………………………………… 
  3 
4 
Definitions…………………………………………………………………………….. 
  6 
5 
Forms…………………………………………………………………………………... 
  7 
6 
Delegation and Designation Instruments………………………………………... 
  8 
7 
Departmental Policy…………………………………………………………………. 
  9 
 
7.1 Deposits and guarantees………………………………………………………....      9 
 
7.2 General requirements…………………………………………………………….. 
10 
8 
Procedures…………………………………………………………………………….. 
13 
 
8.1 General……………………………………………………………………………... 
13 
 
8.2 Receiving Orders for Release from the Immigration Division (ID) or delegated 
officer………………………………………………………………………………….… 
15 
 
8.3 Modifications of conditions of release…………………………………………... 
15 
 
8.4 Surrendered passports and other documents…………………………………. 
16 
 
8.5 Deposits – General……………………………………………………………..… 
16 
 
8.6 Ability to ensure person concerned will comply with deposit conditions……. 
17 
 
8.7 Establish identity of depositor……………………………………………………. 
17 
 
8.8 Acceptable forms of payment for deposits……………………………………... 
18 
 
8.9 Taking the deposit………………………………………………………………… 
18 
 
8.10 Altering or amending a deposit…………………………………………………. 
21 
 
8.11 Guarantees – General…………………………………………………………... 
22 
 
8.12 Ability to ensure the person concerned will comply with conditions of 
guarantee………………………………………………………………………………. 
22 
 
8.13 Establish identity of guarantor…………………………………………………. 
24 
 
8.14 Determining solvency for guarantors………………………………………….. 
25 
  
8.15 Taking a guarantee……………………………………………………………… 
28 
   
8.16 Altering or amending a guarantee……………………………………………... 
28 
 
8.17 Rejecting a deposit or guarantee………………………………………………. 
29 
 
8.18 Stay of removal order…………………………………………………………… 
30 
 
8.19 Withdrawal, refund and forfeiture of a deposit or enforcement of a 
guarantee………………………………………………………………………………. 
30 
 
8.20 Requests for information………………………………………………………... 
Appendix A:  Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security 
Deposit…………………………………………………………………………………….   
Appendix B:  Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security 
deposit and cancellation of performance bond………………………………………. 
Appendix C:  Sample letter— Notification to Guarantor re: Cancellation of 
Performance Bond……………………………………………………………………….  
 
35 
 
36 
37 
 
38 
 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
2 
Updates to chapter  
Listing by date:  
2020-10-07 
 
Sections 3 and 8 have been updated to reflect regulatory changes, including the addition of prescribed 
factors for consideration under subsection 47(4) of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations. 
Updates have also been made to reflect new BSF Acknowledgement of conditions form. Content has 
been updated to include sample form letters. Minor changes and clarifications have been provided 
throughout the chapter.    
 
 
2017-05-15 
Substantive and minor changes, as well as clarifications, have been provided throughout the chapter. 
2007-02-01 
Changes have been made to Section 7.8 and a paragraph has been deleted. In addition, the title of the 
Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness has been changed to Minister of Public Safety.  
2005-11-08  
Changes have been made throughout chapter ENF 8 to reflect the change in responsibilities as a result of 
the CIC/CBSA transition. All previous versions should be discarded.  
Of particular note are the following modifications: 
 
changes have been made throughout this chapter to reflect accurate officer titles within the CBSA 
and CIC.  
 
section 4, Instruments and delegations, outlines specific roles and authorities of CIC and CBSA 
personnel.  
2004-11-04 
Editorial modifications have been made throughout this chapter. All previous versions should be 
discarded.  
2004-01-15  
The chapter’s name has been changed to “Deposits and Guarantees” to better reflect the terminology of 
IRPA and its Regulations.  
 
 


===== PAGE 3 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
3 
1 What this chapter is about  
 
This chapter provides functional guidance to the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA), both at the 
Port of Entry and Inland, as well as Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) officers, 
managers and others with the delegated and designated authority to impose the payment of deposits and 
the posting of guarantees in respect of persons seeking entry to Canada, and permanent residents and 
foreign nationals who are the subject of an inadmissibility report, an admissibility hearing, or a removal 
order.  
 
 
2 Program objectives  
 
The use of deposits and guarantees, also referred to as “bonds”, in the Canadian immigration program is 
intended to: 
 
 
ensure that persons seeking temporary entry comply with any conditions that may be imposed on 
them under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and the Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Regulations (IRPR);  
 
 
ensure that persons subject to an inadmissibility report, an admissibility hearing or a removal 
order comply with any conditions that may be imposed under the IRPA and IRPR; and  
 
 
allow the release of a person held in immigration detention, based on that person's agreement to 
abide by any conditions of release, to ensure compliance with the IRPA and IRPR.  
 
 
3 The Act and Regulations  
 
This part of the chapter provides a guide to the IRPA and IRPR provisions concerning deposits and 
guarantees, for officers’ reference. 
IRPA – Deposits and guarantees  
Section  
The authority to make Regulations regarding conditions 
that may be imposed on permanent residents and foreign 
nationals and Regulations governing deposits or 
guarantees for the performance of obligations imposed 
A14(2)  
A14(2)(d) 
A14(2)(f) 
Authority for a CBSA or IRCC officer or the Immigration 
Division to impose conditions including the payment of a 
deposit or posting of a guarantee for compliance with 
conditions imposed by a CBSA or IRCC officer or the 
Immigration Division on a permanent resident or foreign 
national who is the subject of a report, an admissibility 
hearing or, being in Canada, a removal order 
A44(3)  
Authority for a CBSA officer to order the release from 
detention before the first detention review of a permanent 
resident or foreign national on payment of a deposit or 
posting of a guarantee, if required, for compliance with the 
conditions imposed 
A56  
Authority for the Minister to order the release on request 
of a Designated Foreign National aged 16 or older from 
A58.1 


===== PAGE 4 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
4 
detention and to impose any conditions, including the 
payment of a deposit or the posting of a guarantee for 
compliance with the conditions deemed necessary. 
Note: This authority is not currently delegated, but is held 
by the Minister of Public Safety. 
Authority for the Immigration Division to impose conditions 
of release on a permanent resident or foreign national, 
including the payment of a deposit or the posting of a 
guarantee for compliance with the conditions 
A58(3)  
Authority to collect monies that a person has agreed to 
pay as a deposit or guarantee of performance is a debt 
due to the Crown 
A145(1) 
A145(1)(b) 
Authority to certify debts due that have not been paid, if 
either the Minister of Immigration, Refugees and 
Citizenship (IRCC) or the Minister of Public Safety is of 
the opinion that the person liable for the amount is 
attempting to avoid payment, or on the expiration of 30 
days after the default 
A146(1) 
A146(1)(a) 
A146(1)(b) 
The certificate, when filed and registered in the Federal 
Court, has the same force and effect, and all proceedings 
may be taken, as if the certificate were a judgment 
obtained for a debt of the amount specified in the 
certificate plus interest to the day of payment 
A146(2) 
Authority to recover costs of registering the certificate  
A146(3) 
Authority for the Minister to garnish all or part of a debt 
due to the Crown, if the Minister is of the opinion that a 
third person is or is about to become liable to make a 
payment to a person liable to make a payment under 
IRPA 
A147  
IRPR – Deposits and guarantees  
Section  
Authority for an officer to require a deposit or guarantee in 
respect of a person or group of persons seeking entry to 
Canada for compliance with conditions imposed 
R45(1)  
Officers are to fix the amount of the deposit or guarantee 
on the basis of the following factors: 
 
 
the financial resources of the person or group; 
 
the obligations that result from the conditions 
imposed; 
 
the costs likely to be incurred to locate and arrest 
the person or group, detain them, hold an 
admissibility hearing and remove them from 
Canada; and 
 
 
the costs likely to be incurred to enforce a 
guarantee 
R45(2)  
R45(2)(a) 
R45(2)(b) 
 
R45(2)(c) 
R45(2)(d) 


===== PAGE 5 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
5 
A person who pays a deposit or posts a guarantee:  
 
 
must not have signed or co-signed another 
guarantee that is in default; and 
 
 
must have the capacity to contract in the province 
where the deposit is paid or the guarantee is 
posted 
R47(1) 
R47(1)(a) 
R47(1)(b) 
A person who posts a guarantee must:  
 
 
be a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, 
physically present and residing in Canada; 
 
 
be able to ensure that the person or group of 
persons in respect of whom the guarantee is 
required will comply with the conditions imposed; 
and 
 
 
present to an IRCC or CBSA officer evidence of 
their ability to fulfill the obligation arising from the 
guarantee 
R47(2)  
R47(2)(a) 
 
R47(2)(b) 
 
R47(2)(c) 
Money illegally obtained: 
 
If a CIC or CBSA officer believes a sum of money offered 
as a deposit, or a sum of money that a person may be 
obliged to pay under a guarantee was, or would not be 
legally obtained, the CIC or CBSA officer shall not allow 
that person to pay a deposit or post a guarantee 
 
R47(3)  
Factors to consider 
 
An officer, the Immigration Division or the Minister must 
consider the following factors in assessing whether the 
person who posts a guarantee has the ability to ensure 
that the person or group of persons in respect of whom 
the guarantee is required will comply with the conditions 
imposed: 
(a) their relationship to the person or group of persons in 
respect of whom the guarantee is required; 
(b) their financial situation; 
(c) any previous history posting a guarantee; 
(d) their criminal record; and 
(e) any other relevant factor in determining their ability to 
ensure that the person or group of persons in respect of 
whom the guarantee is required will comply with the 
conditions imposed. 
R47(4) 
Mandatory conditions to be imposed on the person or 
group of persons in respect of which a guarantee is 
required:  
 
 
provide the IRCC or CBSA with the address of 
the guarantor and advise the IRCC or CBSA 
before any change in that address; and 
 
R48(1) 
 
R48(1)(a) 


===== PAGE 6 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
6 
 
appear at time and place required by an IRCC or 
CBSA officer or the ID to comply with any 
obligation imposed under IRPA 
 
R48(1)(b) 
Mandatory conditions to be imposed on the person or 
group of persons in respect of which a deposit is required: 
 
 
provide address and change of address 
 
 
appear at time and place required to comply with 
an obligation imposed 
R48(2)  
 
R48(2)(a) 
R48(2)(b) 
Mandatory written acknowledgment required from the 
person who pays a deposit or posts a guarantee: 
 
 
that they have been informed of the conditions 
imposed; and 
 
That they have been informed that non-
compliance with any conditions imposed will 
result in forfeiture of the deposit or enforcement 
of the guarantee 
R49(1)  
R49(1)(a) 
R49(1)(b) 
Requirement on officer to issue a receipt to the depositor 
and guarantor for the deposit or a copy of the guarantee, 
and a copy of the conditions imposed 
R49(2) 
Requirement of the IRCC or CBSA to return the deposit 
paid after an officer notifies the IRCC or CBSA of  
compliance with conditions imposed 
R49(3) 
Sum of money deposited is forfeited, and guarantee 
becomes enforceable on the failure of the person or any 
member of group to comply with any condition imposed 
R49(4)  
 
 
4. Definitions  
Bond 
Deposits and guarantees paid or posted to ensure compliance of 
the person concerned with IRPA conditions. 
 
Bondsperson 
The depositor or guarantor who paid or posed a deposit or 
guarantee to ensure compliance of the person concerned with 
IRPA conditions. This term is generic and refers to both depositors 
and guarantors. 
 
Cash Bond  
A cash bond is a deposit. 
 
Depositor 
The person who pays a deposit to ensure compliance by the 
person concerned or the group with conditions imposed under 
IRPA or IRPR. 
 
Deposit 
The payment of a sum of money by a person to the Receiver 
General for Canada for compliance with the conditions imposed on 
the person concerned’s release from detention. 
 


===== PAGE 7 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
7 
Forfeiture / Forfeit 
 
The relinquishment of the deposit as a consequence of a breach of 
conditions.  
 
Guarantee 
A guarantee is an written enforceable undertaking by a third party 
(the guarantor) that the person concerned will abide by the 
conditions imposed by a CBSA or IRCC officer or the Immigration 
Division and to forfeit or pay a sum of money to the Crown if the 
person concerned breaches any conditions. The guarantor and the 
person concerned must both agree to the conditions. They are also 
called “performance bonds”. 
 
Guarantee in default 
A guarantee is in default when a formal demand for payment of the 
amount guaranteed has been made to the guarantor and the 
amount has not yet been paid or otherwise extinguished. 
 
Guarantor 
The person who posts a guarantee with IRCC or the CBSA to 
ensure compliance with conditions imposed under IRPA or IRPR 
on the person concerned. 
 
Performance Bond 
A performance bond has the same meaning as the term 
“guarantee”. 
 
Person concerned 
The foreign national or permanent resident or the group of persons 
on whom conditions are imposed by an IRCC or CBSA officer or 
the Immigration Division and who is the subject of the deposit or 
guarantee. 
 
Power of Attorney  
 
A legal document signed by a person to authorize another person 
(the “attorney”) to act on their behalf in respect of all or some of 
their finances and property. The “attorney” does not need to be a 
lawyer.  The document must have been issued in accordance with 
the laws of the province where it was signed. 
 
Liquid funds  
Cash or any investment that can easily and quickly be converted to 
cash (e.g. money in personal accounts; stocks and bonds).  
 
Reasonable grounds to believe 
Credible evidence that would produce in a normally prudent and 
informed person bona fide belief in a serious possibility. They are 
not mere suspicions. 
 
Security deposit 
This term has the same meaning as that for “deposit”. 
 
 
 
5. Forms  
 
All forms required for the processing of a deposit or guarantee are listed below and are accessible on 
IRCC Connexion under Forms or on CBSA Atlas under Forms and Templates.  
 
Forms used for deposits and guarantees are generally IMM forms for historical reasons as the authority to 
perform most functions relating to deposits and guarantees is delegated to both IRCC and CBSA officers. 
However, some IMM forms now have BSF equivalents. Where an IMM form has a BSF equivalent, CBSA 
officers shall use the BSF form for the action. 
 


===== PAGE 8 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
8 
Title  
Number  
Acknowledgement of Conditions - The Immigration and 
Refugee Protection Act  
BSF821  
Amendment to Guarantee for Compliance Issued  
 IMM 5071B  
Guarantee of Compliance Enforcement Notice  
IMM 5072B 
Guarantee Bond – The Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act  (Where there are Co-Signers)  
Performance Bond – The Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act  (Where there are Co-Signers) 
BSF507E 
 
IMM 1259E  
Guarantee Log  
IMM 5073B  
Performance Bond  – The Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act  (Guarantee) 
IMM 1230E  
Request for a Security Deposit pursuant to R45(1)  
(at the port of entry only) 
BSF517E 
Requisition for Enforcement of Guarantee  
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act and Regulations  
IMM 5345B  
Requisition for Refund / Forfeiture of Security Deposit  
IMM 0709B*  
Security Deposit  
(this form is also the official receipt for deposits) 
BSF579*  
Solemn Declaration of Solvency by Guarantor  
BSF564  
Financial information related to deposits or guarantees 
assessed during the detention review process 
BSF211 
* Multiple copy form that must be completed manually.  Online version of this form in Atlas/ 
Connexion is a sample only 
 
6 Delegation and Designation Instruments  
 
Officers should refer to the most recent version of the Delegation of Authority and Designation of Officers 
by the Minister of Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness under the Immigration and Refugee 
Protection Act (IRPA) and the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) on CBSA Atlas 
and IRCC Connexion to ensure that only delegated and designated officers exercise the authority 
associated to the functions related to deposits and guarantees.  
 
Immigration and Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) 
 
Delegated authority 
CBSA and IRCC officers designated as per 
instruments of delegation 
 
May require a deposit or a guarantee, or 
both, for compliance with conditions 
imposed on the release from detention of a 
foreign national or permanent resident who 
is the subject of a report, an admissibility 


===== PAGE 9 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
9 
hearing, or, in Canada, a removal order. 
[A44(3)] 
 
CBSA officers designated as per the instruments 
of delegation 
May order, before the first detention review 
by the Immigration Division, the release 
from detention of a person and impose 
conditions, including the payment of a 
deposit or the posting of a guarantee for 
compliance with the conditions [A56]. 
 
CBSA, IRCC and Canada Revenue Agency 
headquarters officials as per the instruments of 
delegation 
 
May certify an amount or part of an amount 
payable under IRPA as debts due to Her 
Majesty; may order payment to the 
Receiver General [A146]. 
CBSA headquarters staff as per the instruments 
of delegation 
 
May garnish all or part of a debt due to the 
Crown, if the Minister is of the opinion that a 
third person is or is about to become liable 
to make a payment to a person liable to 
make a payment under IRPA [A147]. 
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR) 
CBSA and IRCC officers as per instruments of 
delegation 
 
May require a deposit or guarantee in 
respect of a person or group seeking to 
enter Canada for compliance with 
conditions imposed [R45(1)]. 
 
May fix the amount of the deposit or 
guarantee [R45(2)]. 
 
May refuse to allow a person to pay a 
deposit or post a guarantee [R47(3)]. 
 
Shall impose mandatory conditions when 
deposit or guarantee required [R48]. 
 
Shall issue a receipt for the payment of a 
deposit or a copy of the guarantee, and a 
copy of the conditions imposed [R49(2)]. 
 
7 Departmental policy  
 
7.1 Deposits and guarantees  
 
The purpose of requiring deposits and guarantees (collectively referred to as bonds) under the IRPA or 
IRPR is to motivate the person concerned or group to comply with the conditions imposed which are 
intended to ensure that they will appear at the next required IRPA proceeding. They also serve as an 
incentive for the bondsperson to ensure compliance. 
 
CBSA or IRCC officers may request the payment of a deposit or the posting of a guarantee, or both, 
under the following circumstances: 
 


===== PAGE 10 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
10 
 
At a port of entry, a CBSA officer may require a person or group of persons seeking to enter 
Canada to pay a deposit or post a guarantee, or both, for compliance with any conditions 
imposed [R45(1)]. (For the purpose of this section a group of persons refers to a group of persons 
such as an entertainment group coming to Canada for the same purpose. This section is not 
meant to apply to several different individuals believed to be part of an organized smuggling ring. 
In scenarios such as this, the requirement for a security deposit or guarantee should be assessed 
on an individual basis.) 
 
 
At a port of entry or inland office, a CBSA or IRCC officer may impose conditions and require a 
permanent resident or foreign national who is the subject of an inadmissibility report, admissibility 
hearing or a removal order to pay a deposit or post a guarantee. [A44(3)].                                
 
Note: the delegated authority to impose conditions on permanent residents is at supervisory level 
or higher. 
 
 
Where a permanent resident or foreign national has been detained pursuant to the IRPA or IRPR 
and a CBSA officer orders their release before the first detention review by the Immigration 
Division, the CBSA officer may impose conditions and require that they pay a deposit or that a 
guarantee be posted [A56].  
 
 
At a detention review or admissibility hearing, a CBSA Hearings Officer may request the 
Immigration Division to impose conditions, including the requirement to pay a deposit or post a 
guarantee, on a foreign national or permanent resident prior to ordering they be released from 
detention [A58(3)].  
 
 
7.2 General requirements  
 
Note: for procedures, refer to Part 8. 
 
The following requirements apply to deposits and guarantees: 
 
7.2.1 Delegated Officers 
 
 
When imposing the requirement to pay a deposit or post a guarantee under A44(3) or A56, 
delegated officers are responsible to ensure that a person who pays a deposit (depositor) or 
posts a guarantee (guarantor) meets the regulatory requirements. The officers should thoroughly 
assess any potential bondsperson who offers to pay a deposit or post a guarantee and, where 
that person does not satisfy the regulatory requirements, they shall not be permitted to pay a 
deposit or post a guarantee. 
 
 
Only delegated officers may make decisions regarding deposits and guarantees, including the 
assessment of whether the person proposing to post a deposit or guarantee meets any regulatory 
requirements and is otherwise suitable.  
 
7.2.2 Immigration Division (ID)  
 
 
The Immigration Division (ID) may, at detention review, order the person concerned released 
pending continuation of an examination, an admissibility hearing, or removal, and may impose 
conditions, including the payment of a deposit or a guarantee. 
 
 
Inland Enforcement Officers may provide valuable input concerning specific requirements under 
R47 (e.g. the proposed bondsperson is in default of a previous guarantee; money offered as a 
deposit was not legally obtained, the proposed bondsperson is not a Canadian citizen or 
permanent resident, not physically present and residing in Canada; the proposed bondsperson is 
not able to ensure that the person concerned will comply with conditions, etc.) or if a proposed 


===== PAGE 11 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
11 
residential address for the release is of concern. In these cases, Inland Enforcement Officers 
should articulate their concerns to the Hearings Officer who can address them with the ID. 
 
 
During a detention review when counsel presents an alternative to detention involving a 
bondsperson, the ID and Hearings Officers will assess the suitability of the bondsperson by 
questioning them about their relationship with the person concerned, their knowledge of the 
person concerned’s immigration status and, if applicable, criminal history, potential 
bondsperson’s income, assets, their ability to pay a cash deposit or fulfill the obligation from the 
guarantee, their living situation, their willingness to provide shelter to the person concerned and 
their ability to ensure the person concerned will comply with conditions imposed on their release. 
In this context, the ID is also required to assess the factors for consideration prescribed under 
R47(2)(d) with respect to persons coming forward as potential guarantors.   
 
 
If release on conditions including a requirement of a deposit or guarantee is warranted, the 
Immigration Division will name the bondsperson and set the amount of the deposit or guarantee 
required. 
Note: Generally, ability to pay and solvency are not assessed during detention review as 
documents from guarantors may not be available and/or there is insufficient time to do so. A 
bondsperson may sometimes be proposed before a detention review which may lead to the 
assessment of the ability to pay or solvency being done during the detention review process  
 
 
If a Hearings Officer has assessed the ability of the bondsperson to pay a cash deposit and/or 
fulfil his/her obligation from a guarantee, and the Hearings Officer is satisfied that the 
bondsperson has the ability to pay the cash deposit and/or fulfil the guarantee, the Hearings 
Officer will document this information on form BSF211.  In those instances, Inland Enforcement 
Officers may not re-assess the ability to pay or the solvency of the named bondsperson when 
they seek to pay the deposit or post the guarantee (refer to section 8.14 Determining Solvency for 
Guarantors for further details). This is subject to the following exceptions: 
 
 
Officers uncover information after the fact that the bondsperson has signed or co-
signed another guarantee that is in default; 
 
Officers uncover after the fact that the bondsperson does not have the capacity 
to contract in the province where the deposit is paid or the guarantee is posted; 
or 
 
Officers uncover information after the fact that there are reasonable grounds to 
believe that a sum of money offered by the bondsperson to pay a cash deposit 
was not legally obtained or a sum of money that the bondsperson is obliged to 
pay under a guarantee was not legally obtained; 
 
The Hearings Officer should communicate these exceptions to the tribunal, detainee and counsel.  
 
 
Generally, the suitability of a bondsperson is assessed during the detention review without 
assessing their ability to pay a cash deposit or to fulfil a guarantee as no evidence or insufficient 
evidence was presented during the detention review process on the financial situation of the 
bondsperson and/or there is insufficient time to do so. This may occur for instance in situations 
where the bondsperson was not proposed in advance of the detention review. In those cases, 
the Hearings Officer should clearly indicate to the tribunal, the detainee, and counsel (if 
applicable), that another officer will determine whether the bondsperson has ability to pay the 
cash deposit and/or fulfil the guarantee before release can occur.  Hearings Officers may use 
BSF211 to provide comments to the officer who will be responsible to take the bond or if they 
wish to bring specific information to their attention.  
 
 
Once the ID has made a decision to release and specified conditions, an officer processing the 
bond has no legal authority to reject or change the conditions; however if the officer has specific 


===== PAGE 12 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
12 
concerns regarding the deposit or guarantee requirements, the officer should communicate their 
concerns to the Hearings Officer who can address them, if appropriate, with the ID.  
 
7.2.3 Choice of deposit or guarantee: 
 
 
When the imposition of a deposit or guarantee is warranted, deposits are always preferred to 
guarantees, but a combination of both may be acceptable.  
 
 
If the person who will be paying a deposit or posting a guarantee has sufficient liquid funds (see 
Definitions) for the amount of deposit deemed appropriate, a deposit should be required.  
 
7.2.4 Minimum qualifications for bondspersons: 
 
 
Bondspersons must not have signed or co-signed another guarantee that is in default [R47(1)(a)]; 
and  
 
 
Bondspersons must have the capacity to contract in the province where the deposit is paid or the 
guarantee posted [R47(1)(b)]. Bondspersons must not suffer from any serious mental disability 
that would render them incapable of understanding the bond. In addition, they should be at the 
age of majority according to the law of the relevant province or older. 
Note: A guarantee that is “in default” means that a formal demand for payment of the amount 
guaranteed has been made to the guarantor and the amount owing has not yet been paid or 
otherwise extinguished. Where a person concerned under a guarantee has breached conditions 
and no formal demand for payment of the guarantee has been issued, the guarantee is not in 
default and the guarantor would not be disqualified under R47(1)(a). 
 
 
Guarantors must be Canadian citizens or permanent residents, physically present and residing in 
Canada [R47(2)(a)]; and  
 
Note: The requirement that the guarantor be a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident does not 
apply to cash bonds. 
 
 
Guarantors must be able to ensure that the person concerned will comply with the conditions 
imposed. 
 
7.2.5 Conditions 
 
 
It is imperative that the CBSA and IRCC officers ensure that the person concerned and the 
bondsperson understand the conditions of the deposit or guarantee and the repercussions for 
violating the conditions.  
 
 
The bondsperson is required to acknowledge in writing (BSF579 for security deposits or 
BSF507E for guarantees) that they have been informed of the conditions imposed and that non-
compliance with any of the conditions will result in forfeiture of the deposit or enforcement of the 
guarantee [R49(1)]. 
 
 
CBSA Inland Enforcement Officers are normally responsible for monitoring of compliance of 
conditions for deposits and guarantees.  
 
 
Where the person concerned fails to comply with any of the conditions imposed, the deposit will 
be declared forfeited or the guarantee will be enforced.  
 
 
When the conditions under which the deposit or guarantee was posted are revoked or met, the 
obligation under the deposit or guarantee becomes null and void and the deposit shall be 
refunded.  


===== PAGE 13 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
13 
8 Procedures 
 
8.1 General 
 
8.1.1 Conditions in officer release cases where a bond is required 
 
In addition to any other conditions, the following conditions shall be imposed on a person or a group of 
persons for whom a deposit or guarantee is required (the person concerned):  
 
 
Where a guarantee is being posted: 
 
a) to provide IRCC or CBSA with the address of the guarantor; and to advise the appropriate 
office before any change in that address [R48(1)(a)]; and  
 
b) to present themselves at the time and place an IRCC or CBSA officer or the ID requires them 
to appear to comply with any obligation imposed on them under the IRPA. [R48(1)(b)].  
 
 
 
Where a deposit is being paid: 
 
a) to provide IRCC or CBSA with their address; and to advise the appropriate office before a 
change in that address [R48(2)(a)]; and  
 
b) to present themselves at the time and place an IRCC or CBSA officer or the ID requires 
them to appear to comply with any obligation imposed on them under the IRPA. 
[R48(2)(b)]. 
 
When a person is released by an officer from detention under a deposit or a guarantee with the condition 
to appear at an admissibility hearing, the bond will become void after the appearance of the person at the 
admissibility hearing. To avoid this situation, the conditions of the deposit or guarantee should include the 
following wording:  
 
 
that (name of person concerned) shall appear at the time and place required for the purpose of 
scheduling an admissibility hearing under the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act for 
admissibility hearing, and at each subsequent sitting of such admissibility hearing, for removal, or 
whenever required. 
 
An immigration admissibility hearing is not terminated by the effect of a subject of a deposit or guarantee 
departing and seeking to re-enter Canada [Ravinder Kaur v. Minister of Employment and Immigration, 
FCA, Doc. No. A-295-84, September 25, 1984; Harnek Singh Grewal v. Minister of Employment and 
Immigration, FCA, Doc. No. A-42-80, May 7, 1980]:  
 a guarantee is valid if the person who is the subject of the guarantee has not violated any of the 
conditions; 
 should the subject of a guarantee leave Canada and seek to re-enter to attend the continuation of 
the immigration admissibility hearing, the CBSA officer at the port of entry (POE) should examine 
the person to determine whether a new report and guarantee would be required; 
 a guarantor may be liable for the amount of the guarantee.  
 
When officers release a person concerned from detention on payment of a deposit or posting of 
guarantee they shall use the Acknowledgement of Conditions – the IRCC form] BSF821 to record any 
additional conditions imposed. 
 
For information on cases where the ID releases a person concerned and imposes a bond, see Part 7.2.2 
above, for policy and Part 8.2 below, for procedures. 
 


===== PAGE 14 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
14 
8.1.2 Amount of deposit and/or guarantee: 
 
The amount of the deposit or guarantee is fixed by an officer in consideration of:  
 
 
the financial resources of the person concerned or group;  
 
the obligations resulting from the conditions imposed;  
 
the costs of enforcement should a condition be breached; and  
 
the costs that would be incurred to enforce a guarantee.   
 
Where risk of non-compliance with conditions is high (e.g. history of non-compliance, serious 
inadmissibility, etc.), a large deposit or guarantee may be a more appropriate incentive for compliance 
with conditions.  
 
Where the risk of non-compliance with conditions is low, financial resources may be the main factor in 
determining amount. 
 
A smaller amount may be appropriate when: 
 
 
detention has been for a prolonged period due to circumstances beyond the CBSA’s control 
(e.g. inability to obtain travel document where person concerned has cooperated, or inability to 
remove to certain countries due to country conditions) and the person concerned has been 
cooperative; or 
 
 
prospects of conclusion of the case are very limited in the short term due to reasons outside of 
the control of the CBSA or IRCC and not due to the person concerned’s failure to cooperate 
with the CBSA and IRCC. 
 
8.1.3 Illegally obtained money 
 
If a CBSA or IRCC officer has reasonable grounds to believe (i.e. a belief based on credible evidence) 
that a sum of money that a person would be obliged to pay as a deposit or under a guarantee was not or 
would not be legally obtained, i.e. obtained in a manner in accordance with the law, the officer shall not 
allow that person to pay a deposit or post a guarantee [R47(3)].  
 
 
For the purposes of R47(3), illegally obtained money is money that has been either:  
 
a) obtained or derived directly or indirectly as a result of the commission of an offence in 
Canada; or 
 
b) by an act or omission that occurred outside Canada that was an offence in the place that it 
occurred and if it had occurred in Canada, would have also constituted an offence.  
 
Officers may seek out sources of additional information regarding the source of the money offered for the 
deposit if further corroboration is needed. For example, a credible explanation from the bondsperson may 
either negate or justify the need for an officer to obtain further information. Additionally, the officer must 
use discretion as to the severity of the circumstances and whether further enquires are warranted in the 
circumstances. An example of this type of situation would be if a bondsperson is paying a $1,000 deposit 
or posting a $1,000 guarantee, the officer might make some enquiries and if reasonable answers are 
forthcoming, go no further; however if the bond is $20,000, the officer’s enquiries are expected to be more 
thorough because the amount would reasonably be more of a burden to the bondsperson. 
 
While one possible indicator of illegally obtained money is where the bondsperson indicates that they do 
not file tax returns, it does not necessarily follow that their income was obtained in an illegal manner. For 
example, if the bondsperson admits to not paying income tax, that does not necessarily equate to the 
offence of tax evasion; however if the bondsperson admits to the offence of tax evasion, the officer should 


===== PAGE 15 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
15 
not accept the funds. If the bondsperson indicates that they do not pay taxes or file tax returns, officers 
should engage in a more thorough inquiry to ensure that the money presented was not illegally obtained. 
 
8.1.4 Importance of fully documenting each process, decision and rationale  
 
Officers involved in the determination of whether to require a deposit or guarantee, or both; whether a 
proposed bondsperson is suitable; whether a breach of a condition has occurred; and whether forfeiture 
of the deposit or guarantee will be pursued must fully detail the reasons, including the factors considered, 
for their recommendations and decisions on file. A rigorous approach to documenting actions and 
decisions will assist others, including Hearings Officers and litigators, to understand and defend those 
decisions.  
 
8.2 Receiving Orders for Release from the Immigration Division (ID) or 
delegated officer 
 
Upon receipt, the CBSA officer shall review the Order for Release which sets out the conditions of 
release. The Order for Release can prescribe release on: 
 
 
a Cash Bond (deposit); 
 
a Performance Bond (guarantee); 
 
an Acknowledgement of Conditions; or 
 
a combination of any of the above.  
 
Where the Order for Release is to release on the Acknowledgement of Conditions only, officers shall 
action the Order immediately on receipt, provided there are no outstanding conditions to be satisfied such 
as the surrender of an identification or travel document. 
 
Officers shall complete the Acknowledgement of Conditions [BSF821] in all cases, with the appropriate 
conditions, and have the person concerned sign it. The person concerned is given a copy and the original 
is placed on the client file with all associated release paperwork (copies of all bonds, bondsperson’s 
identification documents, faxes, receipts, solemn declarations, applicable letters, proof of funds, 
conditions of release, the Authority to Release from Detention form, etc.) 
 
If release is ordered by the ID, have the person concerned sign conditions of release specified by the ID.  
 
Where the person is to be released on the Acknowledgement of Conditions form plus the payment of a 
deposit or the posting of a guarantee, officers shall comply with the procedures for deposits in Sections 
8.5 to 8.9, or for guarantees in Sections 8.11 to 8.15, as applicable. 
 
8.3 Modifications of conditions of release 
 
Where release from detention was ordered by a CBSA officer under A56 before the first detention review, 
a CBSA delegated officer may modify the conditions of release, including the deposit or guarantee.  
 
Where the conditions were imposed by the ID under A58, only the ID may modify the conditions it 
imposed. 
 
When a person concerned’s conditions of release from detention have been modified and there is an 
existing deposit or guarantee, the bondsperson must be notified and agree to the modifications in order 
for them to continue to be legally bound by the deposit or guarantee. If they do not agree, the conditions 
should not be modified or if the modification is deemed necessary, a new deposit or guarantee shall be 
required if deemed appropriate in the circumstances for compliance with the conditions.  
 
In cases where modification of conditions are considered and it comes to light that the bondsperson 
cannot be notified as they are no longer at their last known address and the person concerned cannot 


===== PAGE 16 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
16 
provide their current address, the person concerned has breached the mandatory condition imposed 
under R48(1)(a) to advise the IRCC or the CBSA of changes in the address of the bondsperson. 
Forfeiture may be considered and actioned, if deemed appropriate in the circumstances. Should the 
condition modification be deemed necessary, a new deposit or guarantee shall be required. 
 
8.4 Surrendered passports and other documents 
 
 
Where the surrender of the person concerned’s passport or other identity or travel document is 
a condition of release, the passport or other document shall be placed in a Property Envelope, 
clearly marked with the person concerned’s name and GCMS Unique Client Identifier (UCI) and 
placed on the case file. 
 
 
Officers shall provide the person concerned with a Notice of Seizure of Identity Document(s) 
BSF698 form and update NCMS and GCMS with the information on the document seizure.  
 
8.5 Deposits - General 
 
The following guidelines apply to deposits (detailed procedures follow this section):  
 
    A deposit is a sum of money required to ensure compliance by the person concerned with 
conditions imposed by an IRCC or CBSA officer or the ID under IRPA or IRPR. 
 
 A deposit may be provided by the person concerned or by a third party. 
 
 A depositor: 
 
o must not have signed or co-signed a guarantee that is in default [R47(1)(a)]; and  
 
o must be of legal age with the capacity to contract in the province where the deposit is paid 
[R47(1)(b)]. This means that the depositor must not suffer from a serious mental disability that 
renders them unable to understand the conditions of the deposit and other conditions. 
 
The CBSA or IRCC officer should consider whether the person concerned, who is the subject of a 
removal order, will likely be removed from Canada within a reasonable time.  
 
When considering taking a deposit from the person concerned, CBSA and IRCC officers should consider 
whether the amount of deposit is sufficiently high that the possibility of its forfeiture will motivate the 
person concerned to comply with all conditions. If it is reasonably unlikely that the person concerned’s 
compliance will be ensured by the potential loss of the deposit, officers may consider requiring that any 
deposit be paid by a suitable third party. 
 
Deposits by the lawyer for the person concerned or group may be made “in trust” for their client and, as 
such, are a debt by the client to the lawyer. They should not be considered a deposit by a third party. The 
consideration should be whether the requirement to pay that debt to the lawyer, should the deposit be 
forfeited, will be sufficient motivation for the person concerned or group to comply with the conditions. 
 
Although the IRPR does not require that the depositor be a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident, 
CBSA and IRCC officers taking a deposit from a third party should require that the depositor have legal 
status under IRPA and be physically present and reside in Canada, and be able to ensure that the person 
concerned or group will comply with the conditions imposed if these requirements are deemed necessary 
in the circumstances to achieve the compliance objective of the deposit. 
 
If the person concerned defaults on or breaches any of the conditions, legal proceedings may be taken to 
forfeit the deposit (see Part 8.19).  
 


===== PAGE 17 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
17 
When the conditions under which the deposit was paid are revoked or met, the deposit must be refunded 
(see Part 8.19).  
 
8.6 Ability to ensure person concerned will comply with deposit 
conditions  
When exercising their authority to impose a deposit, officers may assess whether a proposed depositor is 
able to ensure that the person concerned complies with conditions imposed. Under A56(1) this will form 
part of a CBSA officer’s requirement to consider alternatives to detention. To clarify, where the matter is 
before the ID, the ID member will be responsible for conducting this assessment during the detention 
review.  
In the assessment, officers may consider factors such as: 
 
the length and closeness of relationship of the depositor with the person concerned or group;   
 
 
whether they are related;   
 
 
whether the depositor has real influence over the person concerned or group;  
 
 
whether they live in close proximity and the frequency of their contact; 
 
 
whether the existence of the deposit and the possibility of its forfeiture will serve as an 
incentive towards compliance by the person concerned   
 
 
the financial means of the depositor. 
If the officer in the circumstances  determines that the depositor is unlikely to be able to ensure 
compliance with the conditions, the officer may refuse the depositor, except when the release is ordered 
by the ID. Officers may consider accepting another person as a depositor in these cases, if one is 
available and willing to post the bond. Officers shall fully document this decision and the reasons in the 
case file. 
 
For further details regarding the assessment of risk and evaluating alternatives to detention, officers 
should refer to ENF 20 Detentions and ENF 34 Alternatives to detention. 
 
8.7 Establish identity of depositor 
 
The IRCC or CBSA should require that the depositor provide the following original genuine 
documentation to prove their identity, status and residence: 
 
 
Government-issued photo identification (e.g. passport; driver’s license; permanent resident card) 
showing the image of the depositor, their name, and age or date of birth; 
 
Proof of status in Canada (e.g., passport; permanent resident card; birth certificate, citizenship 
card); and  
 
A document stating the depositor’s current residential address (e.g., driver’s license, water bill, 
hydro bill, cable bill). 
 


===== PAGE 18 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
18 
Copies of the original identity, status and residency documentation provided for the establishment of the 
depositor’s identity shall be placed on file and shall accompany the security deposit information when 
sent to the Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division.  
 
Failure to provide requested identity, status and residency documents may result in the rejection of the 
depositor or a direction to the proposed depositor to return at a later time with the requested 
documentation. 
 
8.8 Acceptable forms of payment for deposits 
 
Deposits must be paid by the individual listed on the Order for Release. 
 
Acceptable forms of payment, payable to the Receiver General for Canada, are: 
 
 
Bank draft; 
 
Money order; 
 
Certified cheque; 
 
Debit cards; 
 
Credit cards, so long as the credit card holder is the same person as the depositor listed on the 
order for release;  
 
Travellers cheques; and  
 
Cash – only in offices with capability of processing cash payments. 
 
 
Pre-paid credit cards are not acceptable. 
 
When payment is via credit card, officers shall copy the front and back of the credit card used and forward 
it with the deposit package to the Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division for the CBSA and if the 
deposit is taken by an IRCC officer, to:  Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, at the completion of 
the deposit process.  
 
Payment may be made only in Canadian funds, or in the exceptional port of entry case described below, 
in U.S. funds: 
 
 
U.S. funds shall be accepted only at the port of entry where the depositor does not have sufficient 
Canadian funds. CBSA officers shall indicate in the Security Deposit form [BSF579] that U.S. 
currency was accepted. The depositor shall be advised that refunds will be paid in Canadian 
funds and that no interest is paid on the deposit.  
 
 
CBSA officers should refer to Acceptable Forms of Payment in Chapter 10, Section 1 of the 
Comptrollership Manual, Finance Volume, for more detailed information 
 
8.9 Taking the deposit 
 
Two employees are needed to take a deposit, one of whom must be a delegated officer.  This is to ensure 
that there is a witness so that there is protection against accusations of mishandling funds. 
 
The Security Deposit form [BSF579] must be completed and, unless the ID has issued the order for 
release using their own form, the Acknowledgement of Conditions form [BSF821] must also be 
completed.  Officers must ensure that the information is complete (including the mailing address) and 
easy to read. 
 
For R45(1) port of entry cases, the CBSA officer will begin the process by completing the Request for 
Security Deposit [BSF517E] pursuant to subsection 45(1) of the IRPR. 
  


===== PAGE 19 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
19 
The CBSA or IRCC officer:  
 
 
records the personal information of the depositor (full name, date of birth, address, phone 
numbers, driver’s license number, status, name, address and phone number of employer, 
relationship to person concerned, etc.) for the file; 
 
 
verifies that the information on the money order, bank draft, or certified cheque is correct. For 
cash handling procedures, see below; 
 
 
completes the Security Deposit form [BSF579] after receiving the sum of money; 
 
 
advises the depositor that should conditions be met, the deposit will be refunded in the form of a 
cheque (Canadian currency), which may take several months to be processed and that no 
interest will be paid;  
 
 
advises the depositor that it is imperative that they advise the CBSA if they change addresses as 
the deposit will be refunded to the address listed on the Security Deposit form; 
 
 
completes the Acknowledgement of Conditions form [BSF821], (unless the ID has ordered 
release and issued their own form to impose conditions); 
 
 
explains the conditions and the consequences of non-compliance to the person concerned and 
depositor, ensuring that they understand their responsibilities and the consequences should the 
person concerned not comply with any of the conditions imposed; 
 
 
ensures that the person concerned and a witness sign the Acknowledgement of Conditions form 
[BSF821] (where applicable) and in port of entry cases, the Request for Security Deposit form 
[BSF517E]; 
 
 
gives copy 1 (white copy) of the Security Deposit Form (which is also the official receipt) and a 
copy of the signed Acknowledgement of Conditions to the depositor; in port of entry cases, 
provide a copy of the Request for Security Deposit form to the depositor; 
 
 
If the depositor has presented a signed and sealed Power of Attorney document for an 
assignment for the refund of the deposit, CBSA officers shall send the original copy of the 
document, not a photocopy, to Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division at the address below; 
and for IRCC officers, to: Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ; 
 
 
advises the person concerned that failure to confirm departure from Canada may result in the 
forfeiture of the deposit if conditions of the deposit require departure from Canada on or before a 
specified date; 
 
 
provides detailed reasons in file notes for the decision to require a deposit;  
 
 
CBSA staff shall follow the procedures for depositing payments into a financial institution set out 
in Receipts, Deposits and Safeguarding of Public Money and Monetary Assets in Chapter 10, 
Section 11 of the Comptrollership Manual, Finance Volume; 
 
 
The deposit information needs to be entered into the financial systems.  The Corporate 
Administrative System (CAS) document number, or if using TEPs/G11, the K21 or K10 document 
number needs to be recorded on the Security Deposit form [BSF579]; 
 
 
After ensuring the financial systems are updated, CBSA staff shall forward the following 
documentation to the CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, 355 North River Road, 
18th Floor, Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8: 


===== PAGE 20 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
20 
o 
a copy of both sides of the credit card, if payment is by credit card; 
o 
copy 2 of the Security Deposit form [BSF579]; 
o 
a copy of the K10 document if deposit entered in G11; 
o 
original of any valid Power of Attorney signed by the depositor. 
 
IRCC officers shall forward the following documentation to the  Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, 
NHQ, 70 Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1:  
 
 
depositor’s personal information (full name, date of birth, address, phone numbers, driver’s 
license number, status, name, address and phone number of employer, relationship to person 
concerned, etc.); 
 
a copy of both sides of the credit card, if payment is by credit card; 
 
for payment methods other than credit card, all funds collected must be sent to the Revenue Unit, 
NHQ to be deposited in NHQ bank account; 
 
copy 2 of the Security Deposit form [BSF579]; 
 
original of any valid Power of Attorney signed by the depositor. 
 
Hard copies of the bank deposit slip and the internal deposit slip shall be placed in the person 
concerned’s file. 
 
Cash handling procedures 
When a deposit is paid in cash, the following procedures will be incorporated into the procedures above: 
 
 
The officer and the second employee shall separately count the currency in the presence of each 
other to verify accuracy, noting the currency denominations on the Security Deposit form [BSF579];  
 
 
They shall each sign the Security Deposit form; 
 
 
They shall seal the BSF579 form along with the cash in an envelope and shall initial it over the 
seal; 
 
 
The envelope must be labelled with the person concerned’s name, client I.D., deposit number and 
the amount of the deposit; 
 
 
The deposit information is recorded in the office log for bonds, and the officer and employee 
witness shall initial the entry; 
 
 
The officer shall notify the manager via email that a cash deposit has been received, specifying the 
amount of the deposit, the name of the depositor and the document number of the deposit; 
 
 
The officer and employee witness shall deposit the sealed envelope and corresponding documents 
into the safe in the office; 
 
  The employee responsible for handling cash payments in the office will retrieve the sealed envelope 
with accompanying documentation from the drop safe in the presence of a CBSA manager and 
verify the cash amount in the envelope, then secure the cash and documentation in the petty cash 
safe in the presence of a witness;  
 
 
The employee responsible for regional finance transactions will enter the deposit information into 
CAS and record the numbers generated by CAS on the security deposit form [BSF579]. 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 21 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
21 
8.10 Altering or amending a deposit 
 
An amended deposit may be warranted if any of the conditions of the original deposit have been altered 
or amended; 
 
When the subject of a deposit makes a request to the CBSA, IRCC or the ID to have any reporting 
conditions modified and the request is granted, the depositor must be made aware of the new conditions 
imposed on the subject. The depositor is required to appear at the CBSA or IRCC office as applicable 
and sign the amendment to the conditions of the deposit; 
 
The original office involved in the original imposition of the deposit, should whenever possible, be advised 
of any alterations, amendments, extensions, and refunds. 
 
Procedures to increase the amount of the original deposit 
 
To increase the amount of the original deposit, the IRCC or CBSA officer:  
 
 
advises the depositor that an additional deposit is required; 
 
 
completes a second Security Deposit form [BSF579] to replace the original form;  
 
 
provides reasons for the increased amount of the deposit in NCMS or GCMS (as appropriate);  
 
 
ticks off 'Replaces previous security deposit no...' in the Official Receipt box of the Security Deposit 
form, and add the previous deposit number; 
 
 
for the CBSA, forward copy 2 of the BSF579 to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, 
355 North River Road, 18th Floor, Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8; and  
 
 
for IRCC, forward copy 2 of the BSF579 to Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, 70 
Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1  . 
 
 
Procedures to reduce the amount of the original deposit 
 
To reduce the amount of the original deposit, the CBSA or IRCC officer:  
 
 
completes a Requisition for Refund / Forfeiture of Security Deposit form [IMM 0709B] to request a 
partial refund of the original deposit; 
 
 
provides reasons for the decreased amount of the deposit in NCMS; 
 
 
for the CBSA, forwards copies 1 and 2 of the IMM 0709B and documentation showing the current 
address and the proper full name of the depositor (copies of identity documents; proof of address, 
etc.) to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, 355 North River Road, 18th Floor, 
Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8; and 
 
For IRCC, forwards copies 1 and 2 of the IMM 0709B to Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, 70 
Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


===== PAGE 22 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
22 
8.11 Guarantees - General 
 
A guarantee is a written enforceable undertaking by a third party that the person who is the subject of the 
guarantee (the person concerned) will abide by the conditions imposed by a CBSA or IRCC officer or by 
the ID and to forfeit or pay a sum of money to the Crown if the person concerned breaches any 
conditions. The guarantor and the person concerned must both agree to the conditions.  
A guarantor is not required to provide the sum of money, unless the subject of the guarantee does not 
comply with the conditions, hence, a guarantee is also referred to as a conditional bond.  
Officers must ensure that prospective guarantors: 
 
o 
are Canadian citizens or permanent residents; 
 
o 
are physically present;  
 
o 
reside in Canada; 
 
o 
have not signed or co-signed another guarantee that is in default; 
 
o 
have capacity to contract in the province where the guarantee is posted, i.e. be of legal age 
and capable of understanding the guarantee and its possible consequences; 
 
o 
be able to ensure that the person concerned will comply with the conditions imposed; and  
 
o 
present evidence of their ability to fulfil the obligation arising from the guarantee, i.e. pay the 
debt if the guarantee is forfeited. This is the determination of solvency. 
 
When multiple guarantors are required, all must be present and all must qualify as guarantors.  Failure of 
one to qualify will result in the rejection of the guarantee. 
 
Role of the Hearings Officer relating to guarantees 
 
The Hearings Officer will generally recommend to the member of the ID that a minimum set of conditions 
be imposed on the person concerned, including the following:  
 
 
that the person concerned shall present themselves at the time and place that an officer, the 
Immigration Division, the Minister or the Federal Court requires them to appear to comply with any 
obligation imposed on them under the IRPA; 
 
that the person concerned shall  inform the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) and/or 
Immigration Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) in writing of their address and, in advance, of 
any change in that address; 
 
that the person concerned shall not commit an offence under an Act of Parliament or an offence that, 
if committed in Canada, would constitute an offence under an Act of Parliament. 
 
The Hearings Officer provides detailed reasons in the file notes for the recommendation that a 
guarantee be imposed. 
 
8.12 Ability to ensure the person concerned will comply with conditions 
of guarantee 
 
When exercising their authority to impose a guarantee, officers shall assess whether a proposed 
guarantor is able to ensure that the person concerned complies with conditions imposed [R47(2)(b)]. To 


===== PAGE 23 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
23 
clarify, where the matter is before the ID, the ID member will be responsible for conducting this 
assessment during the detention review. 
 
R47(4) lists the prescribed factors that must be considered in assessing whether the person who posts 
a guarantee has the ability to ensure that the person or group of persons in respect of whom the 
guarantee is required will comply with the conditions imposed.  These are to be considered in addition to 
existing regulatory requirements under R47(1) and (2): 
 
a) their relationship to the person or group of persons in respect of whom the guarantee is 
required; 
b) their financial situation; 
c) any previous history posting a guarantee; 
d) their criminal record; and 
e) any other relevant factor in determining their ability to ensure that the person or group of 
persons in respect of whom the guarantee is required will comply with the conditions imposed. 
 
The application of these prescribed factors under R47(4) will turn on the facts of each case.  
 
The following is a non-exhaustive list of specific considerations that may assist an officer who is 
considering imposing a guarantee, in considering whether a guarantor has the ability to ensure 
compliance pursuant to the requirement under R47(2)(b) and the prescribed factors under R47(4): 
 
 
Nature and duration of relationship to the person concerned and the strength of that relationship; 
 
Whether proposed guarantor was aware of the person’s status in Canada; 
 
Whether proposed guarantor was aware that the person was coming to Canada; 
 
When was the last time the guarantor had contact with or spoke to the person concerned;  
 
Current employment of guarantor and number of years with that employer; 
 
Annual income of guarantor based on last notice of assessment; 
 
Whether guarantor owns a home or other property and value of that property; 
 
Whether guarantor is the sole owner of that property; 
 
Whether the guarantor supports any dependents; 
 
Whether the guarantor has ever posted an immigration bond before and, if so, the outcome; 
 
Whether the guarantor has any criminal record in Canada or elsewhere and, if so, whether the 
nature of any criminal conviction(s) would cast doubt on their ability to ensure compliance with 
conditions (e.g. breach of a court order). 
 
Other potential relevant considerations (non-exhaustive) relating to R47(4)(e): 
 
 
Whether the person concerned will reside with the guarantor if a guarantee is signed on their 
behalf and, if not, whether the guarantor will be living in physical proximity to the person for whom 
they are signing a guarantee; 
 
Whether the guarantor ever posted bail in relation to a criminal matter in Canada and, if so, the 
outcome; 
 
Whether the bondsperson ever employed the person concerned illegally while in Canada;   
 
What arrangements would be in place for the guarantor to be able to exercise control and 
influence over the actions of the person concerned; and 
 
Whether the proposed guarantor had knowledge of, or harboured the person concerned while 
that person was illegally in Canada 
 
Where necessary, officers may conduct checks in the Global Case Management System (GCMS), 
National Case Management System (NCMS) and other relevant databases regarding the potential 
guarantor(s) and make appropriate and reasonable enquiries as deemed necessary and appropriate as 
long as it is for the purpose of assessing the prescribed factors under R47(4) for determining the ability of 
a proposed guarantor to ensure compliance. 
 


===== PAGE 24 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
24 
Officers should keep in mind that the factors under R47(4) are considerations, but are not in and of 
themselves determinative of whether the guarantor has the ability to ensure compliance with a guarantee. 
For example, if it is discovered that the guarantor has a criminal record, it does not automatically 
disqualify the person from acting as a guarantor, but may lead the officer to question the person’s 
suitability as a guarantor and determine that, in the circumstances of the case, the criminal conviction 
would cast doubt on the person’s ability to ensure compliance with conditions (e,g., conviction for breach 
of a court order). 
 
If the officer considering whether to impose a guarantee determines that the proposed guarantor is 
unlikely to be able to ensure compliance with the conditions, the officer may refuse the guarantor (see 
Part 8.17 below for procedures on rejecting a guarantee). Officers may then consider other potential 
guarantors  in these cases, unless the release was ordered by the ID, if others are available and willing to 
post the guarantee. Officers shall fully document this decision and the reasons in the case file. In cases 
where there has been an arrest under A55, this decision will be reflected in their consideration of 
alternatives to detention.  For further details regarding the assessment of risk and evaluating alternatives 
to detention, officers should refer to ENF 20 Detentions and 34 Alternatives to detention. 
 
The prescribed factors under R47(4) are also applicable to decisions of the ID at detention reviews. 
CBSA Hearings Officers are to monitor the application of these provisions by ID Members at detention 
reviews and make submissions where necessary. Failure by the ID Members to assess a potential 
guarantor by applying the prescribed factors under R47(4) would constitute an error in law reviewable at 
the Federal Court.  
 
While CBSA officers (including Inland Enforcement Officers, Hearings Officers and Hearings Advisors) 
are free to conduct appropriate system checks as deemed necessary for the purpose of detention reviews 
and the assessment of the guarantor’s solvency when processing an ID order for release, such checks 
should not be conducted upon request of the IRB. The CBSA is not the enforcement arm of the IRB.  
 
Officers are reminded that, once the ID has made a decision to release on specified conditions, an officer 
has no legal authority to change the conditions at the time of processing the bond and may not reject the 
bond based on R47(2)(b). If, during bond processing, concerns arise regarding the bondsperson named 
by the ID (e.g. it is discovered through system checks following the issuance of the ID release order that 
the named guarantor provided false information to the ID regarding one of the R47(4) considerations), the 
officer should communicate their concerns without delay to the Hearings Officer who can address them, 
as appropriate, with the ID. In such situations, it remains the case that officers may not reject the 
guarantee based on factors other than the requirements under R47(1), R47(2)(a), the solvency 
assessment under R47(2)(c) or the application of R47(3).   
 
 
8.13 Establish identity of guarantor 
 
Guarantors must provide the IRCC or CBSA officer taking the guarantee with the following original, 
genuine documentation to prove their identity, age, status and residence: 
 
 government-issued photo identification (e.g. driver’s license, passport, permanent resident card) 
showing the image of the guarantor, their name, and age or date of birth; 
 
 proof of status in Canada (e.g. passport; birth certificate, citizenship certificate, certificate of Indian 
status, permanent resident card); and 
 
 a document showing the guarantor’s current residential address (e.g. driver’s license, utility bill, bank 
statement, pay stub).  
 
 copies of the original identity documentation will be placed on file. 
 


===== PAGE 25 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
25 
 failure to provide identity, status and residency documents will result in the rejection of the application 
to post a guarantee or a direction to the proposed guarantor to return at a later time with the required 
documentation. 
 
8.14 Determining solvency for guarantors 
 
The requirement that a guarantor be solvent, i.e. have sufficient liquid funds to pay the guarantee if it is 
enforced, is intended to ensure that the Government is able to collect on the debt should the guarantor go 
into default upon non-compliance by the person concerned with conditions.  
 
The following principles should guide the determination of solvency: 
 
 
the guarantor’s annual income should be assessed first. The annual income minus liabilities on 
income should be three (3) times the total of the guarantee. For example, a requirement of a 
guarantee in the amount of $5,000 would require net income of at least $15,000 (3 x $5,000). A 
person with annual income of $50,000 and annual liabilities totalling $20,000 leaving $30,000 net 
income would qualify to post the guarantee. If the guarantor’s annual net income is insufficient, then 
the guarantor’s assets shall be assessed. 
 
 
when assessing income alone, the liabilities to take into account are the total of the annual liabilities, 
not the total liability. For example, a loan of $15,000 payable monthly in the amount of $200 would 
constitute a $2,400 annual liability for the guarantor. A rent or mortgage payment of $1000 per month 
would constitute a $12,000 annual liability.  
 
 
assets alone without any income are a strong indication that the individual is likely not solvent, 
however, officers may consider individual circumstances of the case before making a decision.  
 
 
when the amount of the guarantee is too high for the guarantor to qualify on annual income alone, 
both income and assets are assessed; the guarantor’s solvency is calculated by totalling the 
guarantor’s annual income and current assets minus existing total liabilities.  
 
 
officers should ask for income and assets in an amount approximately three times the total amount 
of the guarantee to be posted.   
 
 
existing liabilities should be subtracted from the total of the guarantor’s combined income and assets 
for the calculation of solvency. For example, if the guarantor’s annual income is $65,000 and they 
own a house valued at $300,000, and they have no other qualifying assets, their total income and 
assets would be $365,000. If the guarantor’s mortgage on the house is $280,000, their car loan 
balance is $20,000, their student loan balance is $25,000 and they have a line of credit balance in 
the amount of $15,000, then their total liabilities are $340,000. They have the net amount of $25,000 
($365,000 - $340,000) available for a guarantee, however, if the guarantee required was $10,000, 
they would be deemed insolvent as a $10,000 guarantee requires $30,000 in available income and 
assets. 
 
 
liabilities or debts include mortgage balances; outstanding loan balances; student loan balances; 
credit card balances; line of credit balances; annual rent obligations; and the average yearly cost of 
monthly utility payments (e.g. phone, internet, cable, hydro, water, gas/oil).  
 
 original documentation of source of funds must be provided, and if accepted towards the 
determination of solvency, copies shall be taken and placed on file.  
 
 
where reasonable in the circumstances, to assist in the determination of solvency, officers may 
request proposed guarantors to provide a recent credit report.  
 


===== PAGE 26 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
26 
Assessing income 
 
Income which is not eligible for solvency determination:  
 
 
welfare, social assistance, family allowances, child tax benefits, child support payments, medical 
disability, and worker’s compensation should not be considered in the solvency determination given 
that these payments are made in the public interest and it is unlikely that the Crown would seek to 
recover the amount of the guarantee from these payments to pay the debt on default; 
 
Income which is eligible for solvency determination includes:  
 
 
employment income, proven by the three most recent Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) Notices of 
Assessment, pay stubs; 
  
 
Employment Insurance benefits, including maternity leave benefits and parental leave benefits, 
proven by EI statements, or the T4E;  
 
 
Canada Pension Plan payments / Quebec Pension Plan payments, proven by pension statements or 
financial institution statements showing these deposits; 
 
 
Old Age Security payments, proven by OAS statements or financial institution statements showing 
these deposits;  
 
 
other pension payments, proven by pension statements or financial institution statements showing 
these deposits; 
 
 
investment income such as dividends or interest, proven by the T5 Statement of Investment Income; 
 
 
trust income, proven by T3 Statement of Trust Income; 
 
 
rental income, proven by recent income tax forms submitted to the CRA, or financial institution 
statements showing these payments as deposits combined with proof of title to the rental property 
and rental agreements; 
 
 
earnings on a life insurance policy, proven by statements from the life insurance company; 
 
 
spousal support (alimony) payments, proven by most recent income tax form filed, or by financial 
institution statements showing the deposits combined with the agreement/court order showing the 
amount to be paid; 
 
 
business income, proven by the most recent tax filings, or by financial institution professional 
business account statements.  
 
Regularly documented cash deposits into a guarantor’s accounts may be proof of income; however 
officers should require credible evidence of the origin of these deposits and their continuing nature, as 
well as reasonably satisfying themselves that they are not illegally obtained. 
 
In cases where officers deem it reasonably appropriate in the circumstances, they may accept alternative 
documentary proof of income or require additional corroborating proof.  
 
Assessing assets: 
 
 assets acceptable for a guarantee should be capable for easy liquidation by the Crown. 
 
 equity in property is acceptable as long as the property is in Canada. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
27 
 
 where the guarantor owns an asset with another person or persons, only the percentage of equity 
owned by the guarantor will be considered for proof of solvency;  
 
 letters of credit, credit limits on credit cards, and unused or available lines of credit are not considered 
assets;  
 
Assets which should not be accepted for solvency determination: 
 
 
assets held in foreign locations (e.g. offshore accounts) due to the difficulty of seizing these assets 
upon forfeiture; 
 
 
assets held in forms of ownership so complicated that enforcing the debt would be overly time 
consuming and difficult, for example, a commercial building held by a number of owners; 
 
 
Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSP); 
 
 
Registered Educational Savings Plans (RESP); 
 
 
value of pension plans, including personal locked-in or prescribed plans such as Locked In 
Retirement Accounts (LIRA), Life Income Funds (LIF), Life Registered Income Funds (LRIF), etc. 
(Note: all provinces provide unconditional protection against creditors for money held in a pension plan or when 
transferred out to a personal locked or prescribed plan such as a LIRA, LIF, LRIF) 
 
 
Canada savings bonds and bonds issued by entities other than the Government of Canada; 
 
 
vehicles of any type; 
 
 
tools; 
 
 
machinery; 
 
 
personal property such as furniture, antiques, collectibles, jewelry, artwork, clothing, and other 
personal effects. 
 
Eligible assets for solvency determinations include: 
 
 
savings, proven by the previous 12 month period of financial institution statements; 
 
 
Guaranteed Investment Certificates (GICs), proven by financial institution statements; 
 
 
Treasury bills, proven by financial institution statements; 
 
 
bonds issued by the Government of Canada which are transferrable (Canada Savings Bonds are not 
acceptable because they are not transferable), proven by bond certificates; 
 
 
stocks, proven by stock certificates, where the principle investment is at least 12 months old; 
 
 
equity in real estate, proven by the registered title or deed to the property, the mortgage balance 
statement or mortgage discharge, where applicable, and the most recent municipal property tax 
assessment or property evaluation done by the bank or other reputable institution;  
 
Officers may accept other documentary proof of assets, or require additional corroborating proof in cases 
where they deem it appropriate in the circumstances.  
 


===== PAGE 28 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
28 
8.15 Taking a guarantee  
 
To take a guarantee, the IRCC or CBSA officer shall: 
 
 
ensure that information showing that the guarantor meets regulatory requirements is recorded 
and placed on file; 
 
 
photocopy all documents produced to prove income and assets as well as identification 
documents, and place on file; 
 
 
complete the Solemn Declaration of Solvency by Guarantor form [BSF564]; 
 
 
complete the Guarantee form IMM1230E;  
 
 
complete the Guarantee (where there are Co-signers) Bond, where applicable [BSF 507]; 
 
 
complete the Guarantee Log form to maintain control of guarantees issued and for statistical 
purposes [IMM 5073B]; 
 
 
complete the Acknowledgement of Conditions form [BSF821] which shall be written in a clear and 
precise manner in order to render the guarantee enforceable;  
 
explain the conditions and the consequences of non-compliance to the person concerned and the 
guarantor, ensuring that the guarantor understands their responsibilities and the consequences 
should the person concerned not respect any of the conditions imposed;  
 
 
ensure that the person concerned and a witness sign the Acknowledgement of Conditions form 
[BSF821]. (Under R49(1), the guarantor must acknowledge in writing that they have been 
informed of the conditions imposed and that non-compliance with any of the conditions will result 
in forfeiture of the deposit or enforcement of the guarantee); 
 
 
provide a copy of the guarantee, the Declaration of Solvency, and the Acknowledgement of 
Conditions form to the guarantor; and a copy of the Acknowledgement of Conditions to the person 
concerned; 
 
 
place the original guarantee and Declaration of Solvency, and a copy of all other signed forms on 
file; 
 
 
provide detailed reasons in the file notes for the recommendation that a guarantee be imposed; 
and 
 
 
update GCMS and NCMS, as applicable. 
 
8.16 Altering or amending a guarantee 
 
Any unilateral attempt to alter or amend the conditions upon which a guarantee was posted shall not be 
enforceable. The original guarantee will remain valid and enforceable. 
 
The conditions of a guarantee cannot be altered without the consent of all parties, e.g., an IRCC or 
CBSA officer or a member of the ID, signatory to the guarantee as well as the guarantor. 
 
An amended guarantee is required if any of the conditions of the original guarantee have been altered 
or amended. 
 


===== PAGE 29 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
29 
When the person concerned makes a request to the CBSA, IRCC or the ID to have any reporting 
conditions modified and the request is granted, the guarantor must be made aware of the new 
conditions imposed on the person concerned; and the guarantor is required to appear at the CBSA or 
IRCC office as applicable and sign the Amendment to Guarantee for Compliance Issued form 
[IMM 5071B] outlining the amended conditions. The person concerned is also required to sign the form. 
 
The original office involved in the taking of the original guarantee must be advised of any alterations, 
amendments, and extensions. 
 
 
Procedures to increase the amount of the original guarantee: 
 
To increase the amount of the original guarantee, a CBSA or IRCC officer shall: 
 
 
advise the guarantor that the change in conditions means that the guarantee amount is being 
increased; 
 
 
reassess the solvency of the guarantor for the increased amount, following the process outlined in 
8.14 above, complete the Solemn Declaration of Solvency by Guarantor form [BSF564] and the 
Guarantee Log [IMM 5073B];  
 
 
complete the Amendment to Guarantee for Compliance form [IMM 5071B], explain amended 
conditions to the guarantor and ensure that the guarantor and a CBSA or IRCC witness sign the 
form;  
 
 
provide a copy of the form IMM 5017B to the guarantor and place the original on file; and 
 
 
update GCMS and NCMS, as applicable. 
 
Procedures to reduce the amount of the original guarantee: 
 
To reduce the amount of the original guarantee, the CBSA or IRCC officer shall:  
 
 complete the Amendment to Guarantee for Compliance form [IMM 5071B], explain the amended 
conditions to the guarantor and ensure that the guarantor and a CBSA or IRCC witness sign the 
form;  
 
 provide a copy of the form [IMM 5071B] to the guarantor and place the original on file; and 
 
 update GCMS and NCMS, as applicable. 
 
 
8.17 Rejecting a deposit or guarantee 
 
If the bondsperson fails to provide personal documentation to prove identity, status, residency and their 
current address, or fails to provide evidence of their ability to ensure that the person concerned will 
comply with the conditions imposed, the officer will advise them to return with more documentation or to 
request a change of conditions. Officers will document this action and the reasons on the file as the 
person concerned will continue to be detained in the meantime. 
 
For guarantees, if income and assets presented are insufficient to post a guarantee, the officer will advise 
the guarantor to return with more documentation or to request a change of conditions. Officers will 
document this action and the reasons on the file as the person concerned will continue to be detained in 
the meantime. 
 


===== PAGE 30 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
30 
Delegated officers may make a decision to reject a deposit or guarantee except in cases where the ID 
has imposed the guarantee and named the bondsperson. In these cases, officers shall not assess the 
suitability of the bondsperson and may not reject the bond or guarantee on the basis of R47(2)(b) 
considerations.  Officers can only consider solvency issues if the assessment was not completed by the 
Hearings Officer or one of the exceptions listed in 7.2.2 applies. If justified, the officer may then reject the 
deposit or guarantee and will document this action and the reasons on file.  Since the person will remain 
in detention, the officer must inform the Hearings Officer who will then present this information to the ID, 
client and their counsel. 
 
Once the ID has made a decision to release and specified conditions, an officer has no legal authority to 
reject or change the conditions; however if they have concerns regarding the bondsperson named by the 
ID, they should communicate their concerns to the Hearings Officer who can address them, if appropriate, 
with the ID.  
 
This continues to be the case with respect to the prescribed factors under R47(4): an officer has no legal 
authority to change the conditions at the time of processing the bond and may not reject the bond unless 
it is based on the requirements under R47(1), R47(2)(a), the solvency assessment under R47(2)(c) or the 
application of R47(3). If, during bond processing, concerns arise regarding the bondsperson named by 
the ID (e.g., it is discovered through system checks following the issuance of the ID release order that the 
named guarantor provided false information to the ID regarding one of the R47(4) considerations), the 
officer should follow the procedure for communicating their concerns without delay to the Hearings Officer 
who can address them, as appropriate, with the ID.  
 
For the CBSA, Inland Enforcement Assistants may review the documentation received and prepare the 
file for officer review, but may not make the decision on whether a proposed bondsperson meets the 
requirements and is suitable to post a bond.  
 
Officers shall fully document decisions to reject a bond and their reasons in the case file and NCMS or 
GCMS, as applicable. 
 
8.18 Stay of removal order 
 
Deposits: A stay of removal by the Immigration Appeal Division has the effect of cancelling a deposit 
[A68(2)(b)]. Deposits are to be refunded unless the conditions were breached before the stay was 
ordered. 
 
Guarantees: A stay of removal by the Immigration Appeal Division has the effect of rendering the 
guarantee null and void. A guarantee should be left on file and, apart from the requirement to update 
NCMS/GCMS systems in order to register the effect of the stay on the guarantee, no further action is to 
be taken unless the conditions were breached before the stay was ordered.  
 
8.19 Withdrawal, refund and forfeiture of a deposit or enforcement of a 
guarantee  
 
Withdrawal: 
 
 
if the bondsperson wishes to replace or be relieved of the deposit or a guarantee, another deposit 
or guarantee must be signed or the bondsperson must make arrangements with the CBSA to 
deliver the person into CBSA custody.  
 
 
the onus is on the bondsperson to arrange to deliver the person concerned into CBSA custody. 
CBSA officers will not locate and arrest the person concerned so that a bondsperson may be 
relieved of the obligation of the deposit or guarantee. 
 


===== PAGE 31 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
31 
 
the death of a bondsperson does not render the deposit or guarantee unenforceable. The rights 
and liabilities flowing from security deposits and guarantees are passed on to the executors or 
administrators of the estate of the depositor or guarantor. 
 
 
officers’ decisions on compliance and forfeiture are subject to a judicial review application to the 
Federal Court of Canada. 
 
 
procedures must be in place in each office to review deposits for refund or forfeiture at the 
conclusion of the case before the file is sent to archives. 
  
 
a bondsperson, including a co-signer, may request to be released from the obligation of the deposit 
or guarantee.  
 
 
a bondsperson, including a co-signer, cannot be relieved of their obligation by simply stating the 
desire to be relieved, or by simply requesting it. 
 
 
the bondsperson must apply to a CBSA or IRCC officer, depending on which officer imposed the 
deposit or guarantee, or to a member of the ID if a member of the ID imposed the deposit or 
guarantee. Before relieving the bondsperson of the bond, and if the bond was posted as an offer of 
release by the ID, an application must be made to the ID and the ID must approve the change. If a 
suitable new bondsperson is not available, the existing bondsperson must surrender the person 
into CBSA custody as the person no longer meets the conditions of release. 
 
Refund of a deposit: 
 
When the person concerned subject to a deposit has complied with the conditions of the deposit, as set 
out on the Security Deposit form [BSF579], the deposit will be refunded to the depositor. 
 
The IRPA does not provide specific authority for refunds, but R49(3) provides the authority to return funds 
held in the Consolidated Revenue Fund to the depositor. 
 
Officers shall review the file to determine if the deposit should be refunded. 
 
If the deposit should be refunded, the officer shall cancel the deposit and arrange for the return of the 
money deposited. 
 
The officer shall complete a Requisition for Refund/Forfeiture of Security Deposit form [IMM 0709B] and 
forward it to the authorized manager/supervisor for signature. 
 
When completing the IMM 0709B form, officers shall: 
 
 
confirm the latest address for the depositor and insert it in the “Current mailing address of the 
depositor- Addresse postale actuelle du déposant” field; 
 
 
insert the security deposit number into the “Receipt No. – Reçu no” field in the IMM 0709B. The 
FIN 0007B or the K21 form number is not to be inserted into this field; 
 
 
print the name of the authorizing officer (signing authority) in the “Name of authorizing officer – 
Nom du fondé de pouvoir” field. Initials are unacceptable; and 
 
 
print out authorizing (signing) officer’s title in the “Title as per delegation instrument – Titre 
conformément au document officiel de delegation de pouvoir” field.  
 
Only a manager/supervisor with delegated authority for section 34 of the Financial Administration Act is 
delegated to sign the IMM 0709B, as per the procedures set out in Chapter 2 - Financial Signing 


===== PAGE 32 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
32 
Authorities of the Comptrollership Manual, Finance Volume. 
 
The manager/supervisor will return to the officer the signed IMM 0709B 
.  
Page 3 (pink copy) is placed on file.  
 
For the CBSA, the regional Financial Administration officer and/or Administrative officers, depending on 
regional processes, shall forward the following documentation to CBSA Revenue Accounting and 
Reporting Division, 355 North River Road, 18th Floor, Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8: 
 
 
page 1 (white copy) and page 2 (yellow copy) of the a Requisition for Refund/Forfeiture of Security 
Deposit [IMM 0709B];  
 
copy of the Security Deposit form [BSF579]; 
 
copy of any form completed by officers recording the depositor’s information – sometimes referred 
to as the bondsperson’s information sheet or the personal information sheet (full name; date of 
birth; address; phone numbers; driver’s license number; status; name, address and phone number 
of employer; relationship to person concerned, etc.); 
 
copy of any form or request submitted by the depositor or the person concerned requesting a 
refund of the deposit (this is valuable as it would most likely have a more current address for the 
depositor than the original Security Deposit form);  
 
copies or scans of the identification documents provided by the depositor when the deposit was 
taken (needed to ensure correct spelling of the name for the refund cheque and also to perform a 
name query in GCMS in an attempt to verify the bondsperson’s current address); and 
 
copy of the proof of address when the deposit was taken. 
 
 
IRCC officers shall forward the documentation for action to: Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, 
NHQ, 70 Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1. 
 
 
once the documentation has been sent as noted above, written notification shall be sent to the 
depositor that the deposit has been forwarded to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting 
Division in Ottawa; or if IRCC, to Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ for refund and that 
they should allow ten to twelve weeks for cheque processing. 
 
If information becomes available to cause a CBSA or IRCC officer to recommend that the deposit be 
refunded, rather than forfeited, after a forfeiture has been processed, the refund procedures described 
above shall be followed, detailing the reasons for the reversal in the Remarks section of the IMM 0709B. 
 
Once the bond refund decision has been made and in addition to the completion of required forms, 
written notification may also be sent to the bondsperson at the discretion of officers/managers (see 
Appendix A:   Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security Deposit). Such 
written notification may serve to provide confirmation of the end of the bondsperson’s obligations pending 
receipt of the official refund from CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division in Ottawa, especially 
where the bondsperson has requested such confirmation from CBSA.  Where the bondsperson is also 
being relieved of a guarantee posted for the same client, the notification can include both bonds (see 
Appendix B:   Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security deposit and 
cancellation of performance bond). In correspondence with a bondsperson, it is important that CBSA 
officials do not disclose case details/status due to privacy concerns. 
 
Powers of Attorney:  
 
A depositor may give power of attorney to another person to act as the depositor’s agent with respect to 
all or part of the depositor’s finances and property. In order to refund a deposit to an individual who is not 
the depositor, a validly executed Power of Attorney document must be provided by the depositor;  
 


===== PAGE 33 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
33 
For the CBSA, the original copy of the Power of Attorney or Consent document, not a photocopy, must be 
forwarded to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, 355 North River Road, 18th Floor, 
Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8, before a deposit can be refunded to an attorney. 
 
For IRCC, the original copy of the Power of Attorney or Consent document, not a photocopy, must be 
forwarded to Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, 70 Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1. 
 
Cancellation of a guarantee/performance bond: 
 
Where a guarantee is no longer required as it has been determined that the bond has been complied 
with, it may be appropriate for CBSA officials to advise the guarantor in writing that the conditions of the 
performance bond have been complied with. Without disclosing further case details, the letter will serve to 
notify the guarantor that their obligations specified in the performance bond are null and void and confirm 
the fulfillment of their obligations. Such written confirmation is most likely to be requested by the 
guarantor in cases where the guarantee was not signed in conjunction with a security deposit (see 
Appendix C:   Sample letter— Notification to Guarantor re: Cancellation of Performance Bond). 
 
Assignment of deposit or guarantee: 
 
A deposit or guarantee, is not assignable to a third party.  
 
If a bondsperson wants to “assign” the deposit or guarantee to a third party willing to assume the deposit 
or guarantee obligation, the original deposit must be refunded and the original guarantee must be 
cancelled/considered null and void and then a new deposit or guarantee must be issued, following the 
procedures for the taking of deposits or guarantees.  
 
Forfeiture of a deposit or enforcement of a guarantee: 
 
The CBSA generally makes the decisions on forfeitures of deposits and enforcement of guarantees.  
 
Forfeiture of a deposit is to the Receiver General for Canada. 
 
If the person concerned for whom a deposit has been paid or a guarantee posted breaches any condition, 
a CBSA or an IRCC officer will review the circumstances of the breach.  
 
Although R49(4) does not provide for officer discretion in determining if a breach of condition has 
occurred, jurisprudence (Hamid v. Canada, 2015 FC 1208) indicates that officers have a limited discretion 
to decide whether a breach of conditions is severe enough to warrant the forfeiture of the deposit or 
enforcement of the guarantee. 
 
Recommendations that the deposit be forfeited or the guarantee enforced will be directed to the officer’s 
manager with delegated authority for section 34 of the Finance Administration Act.  
 
The manager, on receiving the officer’s recommendation for forfeiture of the deposit or enforcement of the 
guarantee, shall determine whether the breach is sufficient in the circumstances of the case to warrant 
forfeiture of the deposit or enforcement of the guarantee. 
 
The Regulations do not provide express authority for officers to reduce or otherwise alter the amount of 
the deposit or guarantee. In the absence of express authority, it is CBSA’s position that if an officer 
decides to forfeit the deposit or guarantee, the bondsperson will be held accountable for the entire 
amount of the deposit or guarantee. 
 
The rules of procedural fairness apply when a deposit or guarantor is under consideration for forfeiture or 
enforcement due to a breach by the person concerned of a condition imposed. Bondspersons will be 
provided with notification of the breach of conditions and offered an opportunity to provide written 


===== PAGE 34 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
34 
representations with respect to whether there was, in fact, a breach of condition and whether the breach 
was so minor as to not warrant forfeiture.  
 
If forfeiture or enforcement is warranted, the manager shall have written notification of the specifics of the 
breach and possible forfeiture or enforcement action sent to the bondsperson by registered mail, 
providing them with an opportunity to make a written representations as noted above within 30 days of 
receipt concerning the decision to be made; 
 
All written representations or submissions from the bondsperson shall be considered by the manager in 
reaching the decision; 
 
If the bondsperson has not responded within 37 days of the written notification, they will be sent written 
notification of the decision and reasons by registered mail; 
 
Guarantors are notified of the decision to enforce the guarantee via the Guarantee of Compliance 
Enforcement Notice form [IMM 5072B]. 
   
If the decision is to forfeit the deposit or enforce the guarantee, the manager will direct an officer to 
complete a Requisition for Refund/Forfeiture of Security Deposit form [IMM 0709B] for a deposit forfeiture 
and the Requisition for Enforcement of Guarantee [IMM 5345B] for a guarantee enforcement. 
 
The officer shall complete a Requisition for Refund/Forfeiture of Security Deposit form [IMM 0709B] for a 
deposit, or a Requisition for Enforcement of a Guarantee form [IMM 5345B] and forward it to the 
authorized manager/supervisor for signature. 
 
Only a manager/supervisor with delegated authority for section 34 of the Financial Administration Act is 
delegated to sign the IMM 0709B and the IMM 5345B as per procedures set out in Chapter 2 - Financial 
Signing Authorities of the Comptrollership Manual, Finance Volume. 
 
The manager/supervisor will return to the officer the signed IMM 0709B or IMM 5345B forms.  
 
For deposits, the CBSA regional Financial Administration office and/or officers, depending on regional 
processes, shall forward the following documentation to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting 
Division, 355 North River Road, 18th Floor, Ottawa, ON K1A 0L8: 
 
 
page 1 (white copy) and page 2 (yellow copy) of the IMM 0709B;  
 
copy of the Security Deposit form [BSF579]; and 
 
copy of the decision letter to the depositor. 
 
IRCC officers shall forward the IMM 0709B for action to:  Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, 70 
Crémazie Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1. 
 
Page 3 (pink copy) of the IMM 0709B is placed on file.  
 
For guarantees, the officer or regional financial administration office, according to regional processes, will 
send the guarantor, by registered mail, the original signed Requisition for Enforcement of a Guarantee 
form [IMM 5345B], and place a copy on file.  
 
Following document shall be sent to CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, 355 North River 
Road, 18th Floor, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0L8: 
 
 copies of the Requisition for Enforcement of a Guarantee form [IMM 5345B],  
 the Declaration of Solvency [BSF564; IMM 1416B],  
 a copy of the Guarantee/Performance Bond [IMM 1230E],  


===== PAGE 35 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
35 
 a copy of the letter of decision sent to the guarantor / the Guarantee of Compliance Enforcement 
Notice form [IMM 5072B] sent to the guarantor, and  
 copies or scans of the guarantor’s identification documents taken at the time of posting the 
guarantee. 
   
For IRCC, the documentation shall be sent to Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, 70 Crémazie 
Street, Gatineau, QC, K1A 1L1. 
 
The officer shall update the file as well as GCMS and NCMS. Officers should refer to the NCMS and 
GCMS user guides for further details. 
 
 
8.20 Requests for information  
 
 
Regional offices should not refer requests from the person concerned or depositors and guarantors for 
information about forfeiture or refunds directly to National Headquarters.  
 
A CBSA regional office may contact CBSA Revenue Accounting and Reporting Division, on behalf of the 
person concerned, and the bondsperson.  
 
An IRCC regional office may contact IRCC Accounting Operations, Revenue Unit, NHQ, on behalf of the 
person concerned and the bondsperson. 
 
For any financial coding or financial system transactional issues, the IRCC or CBSA officers should 
contact their regional headquarters.  
 
 
 


===== PAGE 36 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
36 
Appendix A:   Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security 
Deposit 
 
 
 
Client ID: xx-xxxx-xxxx 
 
 
(Name of Guarantor 
Address) 
 
 
(Date)  
 
 
 
Dear Mr/ Ms.XXXXXX: 
 
RE: (Name of client) - Security Deposit XXXXX (Bond #) 
 
 
This is to notify you that (Name of client for whom cash bond posted) has complied with the  
conditions of Security deposit (bond #) in the amount of $XXX (amount of bond) signed  
by you on XXX (date). 
 
A requisition for refund for the Cash Bond has been forwarded to Revenue Accounting section 
in Ottawa.  Please allow eight to ten (8–10) weeks for processing. 
 
 
Yours truly, 
 
 
 
Name and signature of designated CBSA official  
Canada Border Services Agency 
 
 
 
 
Note: This is a sample letter with suggested wording. Preference as to final wording, or the use of pre-
printed as opposed to micro-produced “originals” is left to the discretion of local managers provided the 
content remains consistent with the intent. 
 
 


===== PAGE 37 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
37 
Appendix B:   Sample letter— Notification to Bondsperson re: Refund of Security 
deposit and cancellation of performance bond 
 
 
 
 
Client ID: xx-xxxx-xxxx 
 
 
(Name of bondsperson 
Address) 
 
 
(Date) 
 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. XXXXXX: 
 
RE:  Name of client - Security deposit XXX (Bond #) and Performance Bond XXX (Bond #) 
 
This is to notify you that the $XXX(amount of bond) Security deposit XXX (bond #) 
and Performance Bond XXX (bond #) in the amount of $XXX (amount of bond)   
both signed by you on XXX (date) are no longer required. 
 
A requisition for refund for the Cash Bond has been forwarded to Revenue Accounting section 
in Ottawa.  Please allow eight to ten (8–10) weeks for processing. 
 
Furthermore, your obligations specified in the Performance Bond in the amount of $XXX  
(amount of bond) are now null and void. 
 
Yours truly, 
 
 
Name and signature of designated CBSA official  
Canada Border Services Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: This is a sample letter with suggested wording. Preference as to final wording, or the use of pre-
printed as opposed to micro-produced “originals” is left to the discretion of local managers provided the 
content remains consistent with the intent. 
 


===== PAGE 38 =====
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees 
2020-10-07 
 
 
38 
Appendix C:   Sample letter— Notification to Guarantor re: Cancellation of 
Performance Bond 
 
 
 
Client ID: xx-xxxx-xxxx 
 
 
(Name of Guarantor) 
(Address) 
 
 
(Date)  
 
 
 
Dear Mr/ Ms.XXXXXX: 
 
RE: (Name of client) - Performance Bond XXXXX (Bond #) 
 
 
This is to notify you that (Name of client for whom guarantee posted) has complied with the  
conditions of  Performance Bond (bond #) in the amount of $XXX (amount of bond) signed  
by you on XXX (date). 
 
Further, your obligations specified in the Performance Bond are now null and void. 
 
 
Yours truly, 
 
 
 
Name and signature of designated CBSA official  
Canada Border Services Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: This is a sample letter with suggested wording. Preference as to final wording, or the use of pre-
printed as opposed to micro-produced “originals” is left to the discretion of local managers provided the 
content remains consistent with the intent. 
