

===== PAGE 1 =====
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ENF 34 
Alternatives to Detention Program 
 
 


===== PAGE 2 =====
 
ENF 34 Alternatives to Detention Program  
  
CONTENTS  
1. Updates to chapter ....................................................................................................... 3 
1.1. Listing by date ........................................................................................................ 3 
2. What this chapter is about ............................................................................................ 3 
3. Definitions  ................................................................................................................... 4 
4. Program Objectives ...................................................................................................... 5 
5. The Acts and Regulations ............................................................................................ 6 
6. Forms and Publications ................................................................................................ 6 
7. Departmental Policy ..................................................................................................... 7 
8. Assessment of alternatives to detention ....................................................................... 7 
8.1. Risk identification for ATD Considerations ............................................................. 7 
8.2. Conducting the risk analysis .................................................................................. 8 
8.3. Risk offset ............................................................................................................ 11 
8.4. Evaluation of residual risk .................................................................................... 11 
8.5. Documenting the decision .................................................................................... 12 
9. Vulnerable persons .................................................................................................... 13 
10. Minors ...................................................................................................................... 14 
11. Use of Alternatives to Detention Program tools at ports of entry .............................. 14 
12. Alternatives to Detention .......................................................................................... 14 
12.1. Imposition of Conditions under 56(1) ................................................................. 15 
12.2. Issuance of deposits and guarantees ................................................................ 15 
12.3. In-person reporting ............................................................................................. 16 
12.4. Remote Reporting .............................................................................................. 16 
12.5. Community Case Management and Supervision ............................................... 16 
12.6. Electronic monitoring.......................................................................................... 22 
13. Roles and responsibilities ........................................................................................ 24 
13.1. Community liaison officer ................................................................................... 24 
13.2. CSC National Monitoring Centre ........................................................................ 25 
13.3. CCMS service provider ...................................................................................... 25 
14.0. Jurisprudence........................................................................................................ 25 
15. Presenting the alternatives to detention assessment at detention reviews .............. 28 
16. Privacy and information-sharing ............................................................................... 28 
16.1. Community case management and supervision Privacy Notice form ................ 29 
16.2. Requesting sensitive information from the community case management and 
supervision service provider ....................................................................................... 29 
 
  
  
  
  
  


===== PAGE 3 =====
3  
  
1. Updates to chapter  
1.1. Listing by date  
2023-10-26 
Substantive revisions were made to improve the flow of the manual and to reflect 
updated procedures, including the following: 
 Updated definitions section. 
 Sections 3.0 to 6.0 are new and include Program Objectives, Acts and 
Regulations, Forms and Publications, and Departmental Policy. The forms were 
formally in Annex A. 
 Updated information on identity cases under 8.2.2.Revised information on risk 
offset 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5, particularly around the role of the Community Liaison 
Officer.  
 Updated information under section 9.0 vulnerable persons, including 
vulnerabilities to be considered.  
 Revised information under section 11. 
 Revisions were made to section 12, 12.4.2, 12.4.4, 12.4.5, 12.6 and 12.6.1.  
 New section added under 12.5.3 for CCMS transfers. 
 New section added under 12.5.5 for the use of interpreters. 
 Reference to Voice Reporting as an ATD option has been removed.  
 Revised Community Liaison Roles and Responsibilities under section 13. 
 New section for jurisprudence.  
 
22 June 2018 – Initial version  
2. What this chapter is about  
This chapter describes the elements of the Alternatives to Detention (ATD) Program and 
provides information and guidance on how the tools available under the ATD Program should 
be used.  
  
This chapter is meant to be read in conjunction with  
  
• 
ENF 3 Admissibility Hearings and Detention Reviews  
• 
ENF 7 Immigration Investigations and IPRA s.55 Arrests/Detention  
• 
ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees  
• 
ENF 20 Detentions  
• 
ENF 22 Persons serving a sentence  


===== PAGE 4 =====
4  
  
 
Requests for clarification, questions and comments in relation to this manual should be 
addressed to the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) Alternatives to Detention Unit, 
Intelligence and Enforcement Branch’s generic mailbox at CBSA.Alternatives_to_Detention-
Solutions_de_rechange_de_detentions.ASFC@cbsa-asfc.gc.ca. 
3. Definitions  
Alternative to 
detention  
An alternative to detention is defined as one of the conditions that may 
be imposed on an individual to offset a risk they represent to the 
enforcement objectives and the mandate of the CBSA by either an 
officer or a Member of the Immigration Division (ID) of the Immigration 
and Refugee Board (IRB).  
Case closure  
Case closure happens when an individual enrolled in an ATD no 
longer requires community based support (for example, a change in 
the individual’s risk level or circumstances where the individual has 
other support mechanisms, the individual has been compliant after 
already being de-escalated or the individual is removed from the 
country). 
Community case 
management and 
supervision (CCMS)  
The CCMS program provides in-community support to individuals in 
order to manage and mitigate risk. CCMS promotes detention 
avoidance or detention release for people who lack a bondsperson or 
require support in addition to a bondsperson to mitigate risk upon 
release into the community. The CBSA has entered into contracted 
partnerships with third-party service providers to support individuals in 
the community.  
Deposit 
The payment of a sum of money by a person to the Receiver 
General for Canada for compliance with the conditions imposed on 
the person concerned and their release from detention. See ENF 8 
Deposits and Guarantees. 
Detention review  
See ENF 3 Admissibility, Hearings and Detention Reviews.  
Electronic 
monitoring (EM)  
EM is the use of a global positioning system (GPS), radio-frequency 
(RF) system or both to monitor individuals in the community. The EM 
monitoring system is built on real-time location data, which is collected 
and analysed in a central facility and reported to regional staff to 
pursue for enforcement, as deemed appropriate.  
Guarantee  
A guarantee is a written enforceable undertaking by a third party 
(the guarantor) that the person concerned will abide by the 
conditions imposed by a CBSA or IRCC officer or the Immigration 
Division and to forfeit or pay a sum of money to the Crown if the 
person concerned breaches any conditions. The guarantor and the 


===== PAGE 5 =====
5  
  
person concerned must both agree to the conditions. They are also 
called “performance bonds”. See ENF 8 Deposits and Guarantees. 
In-person reporting  
In-person reporting is a condition imposed on individuals where they 
are required to physically appear at a specified place and make 
themselves known to an official. Usually, this means attending a 
CBSA inland enforcement office and checking in with a CBSA staff 
member, who verifies the individual’s identity and records their 
attendance in the system.  
Service provider  
A service provider provides CCMS services on behalf of the CBSA to 
eligible individuals and engages in discussions with the Community 
Liaison Officer (CLO), pertaining to individuals enrolled in CCMS 
services.  
Withdrawal of 
supervision  
Withdrawal of supervision is a decision made by the CCMS service 
provider to the CLO or CBSA management when the provider is of the 
opinion that the individual can no longer be managed in the community 
(that is, when the individual is no longer willing to comply with the 
requirements of the program).  
  
4. Program Objectives  
The ATD Program encompasses all conditions that can be imposed to manage and mitigate the 
risk posed by an individual in relation to the enforcement objectives of the Immigration and 
Refugee Protection Act (IRPA) and the CBSA’s mandate. The ATD Program provides officers 
and the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB) with tools and programs that enable them to 
manage individuals released into the community more effectively.  
  
The ATD Program is a mechanism to protect the integrity of Canada’s immigration detention 
system by ensuring individuals are treated fairly and in accordance with the overarching principle 
that detention is a measure of last resort, and the decision to detain or release an individual is 
based on the risk they present.  
 
The CLO is the ATD subject matter expert. They provide a centralized approach for the ATD 
program.  
  
 
 


===== PAGE 6 =====
6  
  
5. The Acts and Regulations 
Officers should be familiar with the legislative and regulatory authorities that surround the use of 
ATDs contained in the IRPA and its Regulations. The following are referenced authorities that 
officers should be familiar with: 
 
Authorities 
Sections 
of 
IRPA/IRPR 
Release - officer 
 
An officer may order the release from detention of a permanent resident or a 
foreign national before the first detention review by the Immigration Division if 
the officer is of the opinion that the reasons for the detention no longer exist. 
The officer may impose any conditions, including the payment of a deposit or 
the posting of a guarantee for compliance with the conditions, that the officer 
considers necessary. 
A56(1) 
Release – Immigration Division, Conditions 
 
If the Immigration Division orders the release of a permanent resident or a 
foreign national, it may impose any conditions that it considers necessary, 
including the payment of a deposit or the posting of a guarantee for compliance 
with the conditions. 
A58(3) 
 
Other factors 
 
If it is determined that there are grounds for detention, the following factors 
shall be considered before a decision is made on detention or release: 
 the existence of alternatives to detention 
 
R248(e) 
 
6. Forms and Publications 
The ATD forms reflect the following: male, female and an unspecified options. The unspecified 
identifier is an option that may be chosen by individuals who do not identify exclusively as male, 
female, as well as two-spirit individuals. However, some ATD forms will require an individual’s 
gender in order to ensure their safety and well-being through the ATD continuum. 
 
Form Title - CBSA 
Form 
Number 
Community Case Management and Supervision Referral  
BSF801 
Community Case Management and Supervision - Supervision Agreement 
BSF802 
Community Case Management and Supervision Privacy Notice 
BSF803 
Consent to Share Location with the CBSA 
BSF804 
Community Case Management and Supervision Case Summary 
BSF805 


===== PAGE 7 =====
7  
  
Community Case Management and Supervision (CCMS) Change of 
Conditions  
BSF806 
Community Case Management and Supervision Report of Non-Compliance 
BSF807 
Client Profile Set Up (Electronic Monitoring) 
BSF808 
Client Instructions (Electronic Monitoring) 
BSF809 
 
Form Title - Toronto Bail Program  
Bail Program Supervision Contract 
Agreement of Supervision: Crim 
Agreement of Supervision: Holding Centre 
Graduation Request  
Interview Results 
Withdraw Supervision Letter Template 
 
The ATD forms must be uploaded within seven business days into the Global Case Management 
System (GCMS) and in accordance with the Alternatives to Detention Forms Upload 
Procedures. The forms and assessment should also be placed on the individuals’ physical file.  
 
 
7. Departmental Policy 
The CBSA has established tools and programs that enable officers to more effectively release 
individuals into the community, while achieving balanced enforcement outcomes. The ATD 
program provides risk-based, nationally consistent programming to individuals deemed suitable 
for release from detention.  
 
In addition to the options of releasing an individual on reporting conditions (e.g., in-person 
reporting), cash deposit, or with a bond and/or guarantee upon the establishment of a suitable 
bondsperson, the ATD program also includes the option of: 
 A national Community Case Management and Supervision (CCMS) program that 
mitigates risk factors in a manner that aligns in-community support services with 
individuals’ needs. 
 An Electronic Monitoring (EM) program that uses global positioning satellites, cellular and 
radio frequency technology to monitor an individual’s whereabouts.  
 
 
8. Assessment of alternatives to detention  
8.1. Risk identification for ATD Considerations 
Risk identification is an evaluation of the information available at the time of the assessment. 
Information can be obtained through an interview and should include evidence available that 
may help predict future behaviour.  
  


===== PAGE 8 =====
8  
  
Risks related to the objectives of the IRPA can generally be categorized in the following ways:  
  
1. 
As described in paragraphs A3(1)(h) and A3(2)(g) risk to public safety is related to the 
objectives of the IRPA. Public safety is the top priority for the CBSA. When consequences 
associated with public safety risks are significant, an officer may, where appropriate, impose 
conditions that they consider necessary, and the conditions must minimize the risk and be 
proportional to the risk (Mawut: 2022 FC 415, paragraph 35) for the purpose of release or 
detention avoidance.  
   
2. 
Risk to program integrity is also a key consideration in regards to risk identification. These 
risks relate to a negative impact on achieving all other objectives of the IRPA. The acceptable 
degree of risk depends on the specific circumstances and is discussed further below.  
  
At this stage, the focus is on identifying information that will be considered during the risk 
analysis.  
  
8.2. Conducting the risk analysis  
Once all the available information on potential risks has been gathered, officers must analyze 
the information to determine what weight should be given. The following factors and questions 
assist in determining the weight to be given:  
  
1. How reliable, accurate and comprehensive is the information?  
a. Greater weight should be given to information that is believed to be unbiased and fully 
describes the behaviour or circumstances.  
2. How likely is it that the risk will impact the CBSA’s enforcement mandate or IRPA objective?  
a. Greater weight should be given to information that directly relates to the objectives of 
the IRPA. For example, a history of failing to appear for immigration proceedings or to 
appear before the Court for criminal matters should be given more weight than failure 
to appear for regulatory (traffic) proceedings.  
 
Using the information gathered, officers consider the prescribed factors, as identified in sections 
244 to 247 of the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations (IRPR), as well as some 
additional factors discussed below, as they relate to the grounds for detention. Where the 
individual is subject to conditions under the Criminal Code of Canada, care should be taken to 
ensure that the conditions imposed under the IRPA are not contradictory. Officers should be 
aware of the specific details of any criminal conditions and should considered this as part of the 
risk analysis. 
 
Officers should reference ENF 7 for factors to be considered by an officer before, during and 
after arrest/detention.  
 


===== PAGE 9 =====
9  
  
8.2.1. Flight risk  
Individuals who pose a risk of not appearing for proceedings (Unlikely to Appear) may be more 
likely to appear than not after the imposition of conditions, taking into account the factors in 
section R245 and paragraphs R248(b), (c) and (d) as well as any other relevant factors, such 
as:  
• 
Objective assessment of their chances of gaining durable status in Canada.  
• 
Existence of strong ties to a community in Canada.  
 Strong ties are a factor in favour of release if the ties are to a person or people 
who can influence the person to appear for proceedings.  
 Strong ties are a factor against release if the person or people have shown not to 
have a positive influence and, therefore, become a strong pull factor motivating 
the individual not to appear for removal.  
• 
Access to  sufficient financial means, which may provide an increased ability to abscond.  
• 
Use of false identity documents and aliases to evade detection from the authorities.  
• 
Previous attempts to hide their presence in Canada.  
• 
Lack of credibility, as demonstrated in dealings with immigration or police officials.  
• 
Co-operation of the individual.  
 If an individual is uncooperative with the CBSA, this is a strong indicator that the 
individual is unlikely to comply with imposed conditions.  
  
8.2.2. Identity  
Paragraph 58(1)(d) of the IRPA provides that delegated officials may issue an opinion to the 
Immigration Division with respect to the establishing of identity of the foreign national, which the 
Immigration Division must consider during a detention review. This opinion must be documented 
using the BSF510 form. In regions with Immigration Holding Centres (IHCs) the foreign national 
could be detained at the IHC until their identity is established.  
 
Establishing identity is a two-way street, in that both the Minister and the foreign national must 
work together in an effort to establish the foreign nationals identity. The Immigration Division’s 
supervisory jurisdiction on the issue of identity is limited to examining whether the Minister is 
conducting an ongoing investigation, in good faith, and the foreign national is cooperating with 
the Minister in an effort to establish the foreign national’s identity. 
 
The Federal Court of Appeal in Brown (2020 FCA 130, paragraph 99) states the following:  
“ Detention cannot be ordered on the basis of non-cooperation alone—to do so would be 
contrary to sections 7 and 9. But where the impasse in effecting removal is disputed identity 
and the detainee has refused to cooperate in confirming their identity, delays in removal 
cannot count against the Minister. Release in these circumstances would encourage 
detainees to be less than forthcoming. Where a detainee is uncooperative, detention 
cannot be classified as indefinite because it is within the detainee’s control to change their 
destiny. 
 


===== PAGE 10 =====
10  
  
Establishing the identity of an individual remains the cornerstone to the Canadian Immigration 
System (Singh: 2004 FC 1634, paragraph 38) and the non-confirmation of identity under the Act 
is still a ground for detention.  
  
The CBSA must have enough reliable, accurate and comprehensive information to effectively 
assess the risk posed by an individual, if released. If the CBSA does not have sufficient 
information, release on the basis of ATDs is generally not appropriate until the CBSA is able to, 
based on a balance of probabilities, feel sufficiently comfortable that the information on file is 
enough to predict risk.  
  
8.2.3. Danger  
Individuals who are detained for danger to the public should have their risk mitigated, so the risk 
of serious harm to the public is significantly reduced by the conditions being imposed. Factors 
to be assessed include the following:  
  
• 
assessment related to present or future danger based on prior history;  
• 
positive danger opinion from the Minister; 
• 
association with criminal organizations, including people smuggling and human trafficking  
(membership is not required, just association; a criminal record is not required either)  
• 
convictions in Canada for offences involving violence or drug trafficking  
• 
charges or convictions outside Canada involving violence or drugs trafficking  
• 
age of convictions must be considered, as the more time that has passed since the 
convictions the lesser the risk, taking into account efforts by the individual to rehabilitate, 
including any associated factors, such as substance addiction;  
• 
parole, probation and bail decisions (where available) serve as good references when 
evaluating the level of danger, and may include risk assessment and related supervision 
conditions in the area of criminal history, institutional/custodial behavior, and community 
reintegration potential, etc.  
 CBSA’s assessment may take into consideration third party criminal justice 
agency information from a non-immigration perspective, and strengthen decision-
making pertaining to the conditions recommended to manage risk. Where 
possible, CBSA’s conditions should respect any active parole, probation and bail 
decisions to ensure consistency in the management of individuals risk to public 
safety. 
• 
nature of the risk posed  
 For example, if an individual presents a very likely risk of serious harm to the 
public, the risk should be significantly reduced by the conditions being imposed. If 
the risk posed to the public is based on predictive factors and is more general in 
nature, the imposed conditions should reasonably be expected to reduce the 
general risk posed.  
  


===== PAGE 11 =====
11  
  
8.2.4. Mental health concerns  
The risk posed by individuals with mental health concerns depends largely on the available 
treatment options and the individual’s ability and willingness to participate in the treatment. The 
history of the individual’s compliance with previous treatment is a good indicator of future 
compliance. However, the individual’s history is only one factor to be considered, and should be 
assessed against their current ability and willingness to participate in treatment. 
 
The National Risk Assessment for Detention (NRAD) form is used to determine the appropriate 
placement of individuals in detention. Many of the factors identified and analyzed in the NRAD 
form are likely relevant to a risk analysis for alternatives to detention; however, the analysis of 
risks for purposes of alternatives to detention must be done separately from the NRAD form 
decision.  
  
For more information on risk analysis and the use of the NRAD form, see ENF 20.  
  
8.3. Risk offset  
Risk offset describes the degree to which the condition that is imposed is expected to minimize 
the risk posed. Identifying conditions that effectively reduce the specific risk or risks posed is the 
intended outcome of this phase of the eligibility assessment of an ATD.  
  
A condition imposed as a risk offset should:  
• minimize the likelihood of the risk impacting the enforcement outcome;  
• minimize the risk of harm to the public;  
• address specific negative behaviours of the individual;  
• be reasonable and proportional to the risk.  
  
ATD options may be combined together to offset risk. ATD options are at the disposal of CBSA 
officers to leverage while imposing conditions on individuals that they consider necessary in light 
of the facts and circumstances before them. The imposed conditions must minimize risk and be 
proportional to the risk. For CCMS and EM, a suitability assessment must be conducted. For 
EM, concurrence from regional management is required.  
 
Furthermore, the ATD program options are at the disposal of the Hearings Officer to leverage in 
consultation with the CLO and the Inland Enforcement Officer while making recommendations 
of release during detention reviews before an Immigration Division Member of the IRB. 
 
 
8.4. Evaluation of residual risk  
Residual risk is the level of risk that remains if it is decided that an individual be placed on 
conditions. It is either acceptable residual risk (the risk has been sufficiently mitigated) or 
unacceptable residual risk (the risk has not been sufficiently mitigated). When an officer (CLO, 
Inland Enforcement Officer, Border Services Officer) is considering release, or when a Hearings 


===== PAGE 12 =====
12  
  
Officer is making submissions on a release plan to the IRB, the residual risk posed by the 
individual, after conditions are imposed, is the primary consideration.  
  
 What is acceptable or unacceptable in any given case depends on the unique facts of 
the case. Therefore, a case-by-case analysis is required. It is important for officers to 
remember that if an individual is a flight risk, but poses no other risks, only those 
conditions that minimize their risk of absconding should be imposed. Similarly, if an 
individual poses a risk to public safety, only the least onerous conditions to address that 
specific risk should be imposed.   
  
When deciding if the residual risk is acceptable for individuals who are unlikely to appear, the 
officer should be evaluating, on a balance of probabilities, whether the individual is more likely 
to appear than not.  
  
When deciding if the residual risk is acceptable for an individual who is detained for identity, the 
officer must evaluate the risk of the individual not appearing and the possible danger to the public 
the individual poses, taking into account the risks inherent in not being satisfied with the 
individual’s identity. Additionally, the officer must be satisfied that the ability to continue the 
investigation into the individual’s identity is not negatively impacted by releasing the individual 
on the conditions available.  
  
For an individual who presents as a danger to the public, the residual risk must be very low. The 
IRPA prioritizes the safety of the public and, therefore, any risk posed must be minimal, taking 
into account all of the individual circumstances.  
  
If the residual risk is acceptable, in the officer’s opinion, they may decide to release prior to the 
48 hour detention review or present the release options to the Hearings Officer  for the detention 
review.  
  
If the residual risk is unacceptable, in the officer’s opinion, taking into account the factors in 
paragraphs R248(a) to (d), they should proceed with making a recommendation for continued 
detention to the authorized reviewing manager or the Hearings Officer for the detention review, 
as appropriate.  
ENF 3 Admissibility Hearings and Detention Reviews provides guidance on evaluating residual 
risk at detention reviews.  
  
8.5. Documenting the decision  
Officers are required to document their assessment of ATDs and the reasons for the 
recommendation to continue detention or support release on ATDs. The written assessment of 
ATDs must contain the salient facts and must include, at a minimum  
  
• the information that was available at the time the assessment was made;  
• factors used to determine the weight given to the information;  


===== PAGE 13 =====
13  
  
• the risks identified;  
• for a recommendation to continue detention, the factors in paragraphs R248(a) to (d) that 
weighed in favour of detention, when balanced against the risk offset provided by the 
available ATDs;  
• for a recommendation to release on the basis of ATDs, the risk offset provided by the ATDs;  
• justification for any recommendation that is an exception to the guidelines provided in this 
manual or other operational guidance.  
  
For every assessment completed, all details must be entered into the relevant case management 
systems (i.e., National Case Management System, GCMS, etc.). The BSF forms and 
assessment must be uploaded into GCMS in accordance with the Alternatives to Detention Form 
Upload Procedures and placed on the individuals’ physical file.  
  
9. Vulnerable persons  
Some vulnerable persons have an increased risk, based on their vulnerability. For the purposes 
of immigration detention, vulnerable persons include but are not limited:  
 
pregnant women and nursing mothers; 
 
minors (under 18 years of age); 
 
persons suffering from a severe medical condition or disability; 
 
persons suffering from restricted mobility; 
 
persons with a suspected or known mental illness (including suicide and self harm); 
 
victims of human trafficking; 
 
persons who may face hardship for sexual or gender based reasons or who may be 
victims or survivors of gender-based violence. 
 
It is recognized that detention has a greater impact on vulnerable persons, and detention should 
be minimized to the extent possible for such groups. Risk tolerance may be influenced by 
vulnerability factors. Each case needs to be assessed on its case-specific factors to determine 
if release is a viable option. If the individual has been identified on the National Risk Assessment 
for Detention or through an IHC doctor assessment as a vulnerable person, the assessment and, 
if applicable, a  referral to a CCMS Service Provider must be completed by the CLO within 72 
hours of the vulnerability being noted and the decisions documented as per section 8.5 of this 
manual. 
 
See ENF 20 Detentions for more information regarding vulnerable persons.  
  


===== PAGE 14 =====
14  
  
10. Minors  
See ENF 20 Detentions for guidance on the factors to be considered when a case involves a 
minor child. This includes detention decisions related to parents and legal guardians of minors 
when the minor is affected.  
  
11. Use of Alternatives to Detention Program tools at ports of 
entry  
The assessment process for ATDs is the same at ports of entry (POE) as it is for inland cases.  
Most POE detentions are for a very short amount of time, and the grounds for detention are 
usually related to a high or unknown risk. These factors usually weigh heavily in favour of 
detention. However, this does not preclude the officer’s responsibility to assess and consider 
ATDs in all cases where detention may be continued.   
 
All officers arresting and/or detaining under section A55 of the IRPA, including officers at the 
POE, are required to consider available ATDs. This includes officers detaining on entry under 
A55(3). Border Services Officers could leverage, where necessary and appropriate, deposits 
and guarantees as ATDs when imposing conditions under POE authorities. Please refer to ENF8 
for additional information on Deposits and Guarantees.  
 
In instances where the POE examination has ended and ATDs  are not available at the time of 
arrest/detention under A55, the designated officer (e.g., Border Services Officer) that made the 
decision to arrest and detain under A55 may refer the case to the CLO at the inland office that 
will take carriage of the file, for further assessment of available ATDs.  
  
Border Services Officers should ensure persons with disabilities are entitled to the same services 
as any other person, in accordance with the People Processing Manual Part One, Chapter Four 
– Awareness Issues.  
 
 
12. Alternatives to Detention  
Various ATDs are available and must be reasonably considered prior to immigration detention 
and while the individual remains in immigration detention. The officer should consider the 
individual’s immigration history and potential risk against the maximum risk that can be 
mitigated through each ATD. Accessibility to ATDs may differ between POE and inland 
enforcement offices. The availability of ATDs may be impacted by the time of day of the arrest 
as some require involvement from third parties (e.g., guarantor or service provider). 
 


===== PAGE 15 =====
15  
  
12.1. Imposition of Conditions under 56(1) 
 
 
IRPA allows for general conditions to be imposed on individuals when the Minister orders the 
release of an individual. General conditions can be imposed with or without any additional 
conditions, such as payment of deposits, or in addition to other types of conditions (e.g. 
deposits, community supervision, in-person reporting, etc.). It is important to note that release 
solely on conditions equates to ATDs.  
  
The following are commonly imposed conditions that are appropriate in a majority of cases where 
release from detention is being contemplated:  
  
Condition  
Risk mitigation  
Keep the CBSA 
updated with a 
current address  
A current address allows the CBSA to locate the individual if they 
fail to comply with conditions or requirements, including removal. 
A current address is likely to provide investigative leads if the 
individual fails to comply.  
Report criminal 
charges and 
convictions  
Criminal charges and convictions are indicators that an 
individual may pose a danger to the public, which is a primary 
concern for the CBSA.  
Cooperate with 
obtaining an identity 
or travel document  
The lack of an identity or travel document is often the sole 
impediment to removal for many individuals. Obtaining an 
identity or travel document can take a long time, and the sooner 
the process begins, the more likely the timely removal of the 
person will take place if it becomes necessary.  
Other conditions, 
including those listed 
on the BSF821 form 
(Acknowledgement 
of Conditions) 
An officer may impose any other condition that they consider 
necessary in order to address risk specific to each individual 
provided the condition is proportional to the risk; however, the 
officer must be able to articulate why specific conditions are 
being imposed and they cannot be unreasonable or amount to 
de facto detention.   
  
  
12.2. Issuance of deposits and guarantees  
Deposits and guarantees are tools intended to provide some assurances that an individual will 
comply with conditions imposed. Deposits and guarantees are discussed in ENF 8 Deposits and 
Guarantees.  
  


===== PAGE 16 =====
16  
  
12.3. In-person reporting  
In-person reporting is intended to keep the individual connected with the CBSA through regular 
face-to-face interactions. Regular reporting allows the CBSA to obtain updates on information 
relevant to the administration and/or enforcement of IRPA and allows the individual to ask 
questions of the CBSA in relation to their immigration enforcement proceedings. 
 
12.4. Remote Reporting 
With the decommissioning of Voice Reporting System and the delay in implementing its 
replacement, on a case-by-case basis, an individual may be permitted to report remotely via 
telephone. An individual should only be considered for this option if they cannot physically report 
in-person (e.g., geographical location – individual lives in Whitehorse, or mobility issues).  
 
12.5. Community Case Management and Supervision  
Like all other ATD options, the CCMS program is intended for individuals under the immigration 
continuum, who are cooperative with the CBSA in working towards furthering their enforcement 
proceedings, including effecting their removal from Canada. CCMS provides released 
individuals with services in the community that mitigate and manage the risk they pose through 
case management and pro-social treatment options. CCMS is delivered by existing non-
governmental organizations and community organizations contracted by the CBSA to provide 
these services.  
  
CCMS service providers conduct an eligibility assessment of detained individuals referred to 
them by the CLO and provide the results of the eligibility assessment to the CLO. If the service 
provider accepts an individual into the program and CCMS is imposed as a condition by either 
the CBSA or the IRB order for release, the CCMS service provider will enrol the individual in the 
appropriate program and services, and will monitor the individual as they participate in the 
program. 
  
CCMS services are primarily focused on mitigating and managing the risk of non-compliance 
associated with vulnerabilities such as physical health, mental health, substance abuse, 
addictions and behavioral issues. Additionally, the CCMS service provider can refer individuals 
to existing community resources that provide housing and shelter assistance as well as child 
and family services.  
  
For a limited number of individuals who present a high flight risk or danger to the public, CCMS 
service providers have community residential facilities that individuals can be released to, under 
strict conditions and subject to very close monitoring. Individuals released to these facilities are 
required to reside in the facility, follow facility rules and participate in any programmes deemed 
necessary to mitigate and manage the risk the individual poses.  
  


===== PAGE 17 =====
17  
  
CCMS service providers report any violations of conditions to the CLO who will then consider all 
of the information and consult impacted areas, as required, when determining an appropriate 
resolution.  
12.5.1. Description of CCMS services  
CCMS is intended to address factors that are likely to impact the individual’s ability to maintain 
a stable community living situation. The underlying premise is that an individual who is stable in 
the community is more likely to comply with imposed IRPA requirements and conditions.  
  
The following CCMS services assist individuals in becoming and remaining stable in the 
community:  
  
Service  
Description  
Case management  Every individual enrolled in CCMS receives case management services. 
The CCMS service provider performs an assessment to determine the 
appropriate nature and frequency of case management services. At a 
minimum, the individual is required to report to the CCMS service 
provider at regular intervals to update on changes to their living situation, 
daily activities (such as work and school) and any specific issues that 
could impact compliance with the imposed conditions.  
Links to health 
support  
Individuals who have a serious medical condition that require significant 
ongoing treatment may be eligible to receive support from the CCMS 
service provider in arranging and managing their treatment in the 
absence of a support system of their own.  
Mental health 
assistance  
Individuals with mental health issues that are likely to impact their 
compliance with conditions may have treatment options available to 
them that are designed to support and encourage compliance with IRPA 
requirements and imposed conditions. These services may be provided 
by program operators available through the CCMS service provider or 
subcontracted by the CCMS service provider.  
Addiction and 
substance abuse 
counselling and 
support  
Individuals whose ability to comply with conditions is impacted by 
addiction may be eligible to participate in counselling and/or treatment 
programs designed to minimize the impact of their addiction and assist 
with maintaining stability in the community. These outcomes are 
expected to support the individual’s ability to comply with imposed 
conditions.  


===== PAGE 18 =====
18  
  
Information 
regarding housing 
and employment  
Individuals who are eligible to work in Canada may be eligible to receive 
assistance from the CCMS service provider in accessing local 
employment resources. Employment provides stability in the community 
as well as a legitimate source of funds to live on, both of which contribute 
to the individual being more likely to comply with imposed conditions.  
  
Individuals who are or anticipate having difficulty finding a stable 
residence may be eligible to receive assistance from the CCMS service 
provider in accessing local housing resources. A stable residential 
address is one of the strongest contributors to an individual complying 
with conditions.  
Information 
regarding child-
related or family 
needs  
Individuals with child-care needs may be eligible to receive assistance 
from the CCMS service provider in accessing local resources. A stable 
community and family situation both contribute to an increased likelihood 
of compliance.  
Mandatory 
residency  
Individuals who require close supervision may be eligible to be placed 
into residential facilities operated by the CCMS service provider. These 
facilities closely monitor the individual’s behavior and report any 
concerns or violations of curfews or other conditions to the CBSA  
immediately. Individuals may receive treatment services in some of 
these facilities and be escorted to appointments and treatment programs 
by the CCMS service provider when necessary.  
 
To maintain the integrity of the CCMS program and ensure resources are used most 
effectively, below are guidelines on individuals that should not be considered for enrolment 
in CCMS.  
Examples may include, but are not limited to:  
 Protected persons (including Convention Refugees) who have lost their Permanent 
Resident status due to serious criminality. CBSA cannot enforce the removal order.  
 Protected persons (including Convention Refugees) who have lost their Permanent 
Resident status due to criminality, but for whom a Danger Opinion is not being sought. 
CBSA cannot enforce the removal order.  
 Permanent Residents who have applied for, or have been granted an Immigration 
Appeal Division (IAD) stay. They remain Permanent Residents. 
 Eligible refugee claimant who are eligible for services and programs through settlement 
professionals. 
 
12.5.2. Referral to the CCMS service provider  
At any time throughout the enforcement continuum, an officer, including an arresting officer, the 
Hearings Officer and a CLO, may form the opinion that the risk the individual presents could be 


===== PAGE 19 =====
19  
  
mitigated or managed by one of the services available through the CCMS service provider. The 
CLO, as the ATD subject matter expert, will conduct an assessment to determine if the individual 
should be recommended for an ATD. This includes the completion of all relevant BSF forms, in 
accordance with risk offset strategies and ATD program objectives.  
  
The decision to refer an individual for an eligibility assessment by the CCMS service provider 
should take into account these factors:  
  
• 
Expected removal timeline: 
 CCMS is intended to provide risk mitigation over a period of time, as part of a case 
management process. If the individual is being removed within a few weeks or 
less, CCMS is likely not appropriate, as the assessment and enrolment process 
may take some time.  
• 
Stability of the individual in detention:  
 In the event an individual has medical or mental health concerns that have 
contributed to their detention, these issues must be stabilized while in detention to 
a point that the individual can effectively participate in the assessment process.  
• 
Risk level of the individual:   
 If the risk level of the individual is so high that release on even the strictest 
conditions is only plausible far into the future, an assessment should not be 
requested. The relevance of an assessment by the CCMS service provider 
diminishes over time and should be done only when there is a realistic possibility 
of release.  
  
In most instances, the decision to refer an individual for an eligibility assessment rests solely 
with the CLO. When a CCMS service provider has comprehensive knowledge of CBSA 
enforcement operations, referrals to the CCMS program may also be initiated through outside 
parties, such as the individual themselves, counsel or another party associated with the 
individual (only available through the Toronto Bail Program or by the Immigration Division). 
These may be directed to the CLO for referral or to the CCMS service provider themselves. The 
CLO, in conjunction with the CCMS service provider, will review the request and take appropriate 
action.  Once reviewed by the CLO, the CCMS provider may undertake an eligibility assessment 
of an outside referral following notification to the CLO. For Member directed referrals, the CLO 
will send the referral to the service provider on behalf of the IRB, regardless of whether or not 
the CLO is in agreement of the referral. The CLO should refrain from providing their opinion on 
a individual’s suitability when submitting the CCMS Supervision Referral Form for Member 
directed referrals.  
 
If an IRB Member directs the CBSA to refer the individual to the service provider for a CCMS 
eligibility assessment, the CLO must articulate a chronological immigration history of the 
individual on the CCMS Supervision Referral Form and forward it to the service provider so that 
they can conduct the eligibility assessment. The CCMS Supervision Referral Form must also 
articulate that it is a member directed referral. 
  


===== PAGE 20 =====
20  
  
In the instance of a CLO referral, the referral must include all of the salient facts that  the CBSA 
has available to assist the CCMS service provider in assessing the individual for services and 
treatment.. In completing the assessment, the CLO must conduct a comprehensive file and 
systems review, that may include speaking with the Inland Enforcement Officer, Removals 
Officer, Hearings Officer, and Detention Liaison Officer or IHC staff when necessary. The 
assessment process by the CLO should include an interview with the detainee in order to 
determine ATD eligibility. The CLO should not initiate simultaneous CCMS referrals. 
  
12.5.3. CCMS Regional Transfer  
Transfers of actual or potential CCMS participants are permitted for all intervention levels 
provided that several logistical steps are performed prior to doing so. Whenever possible, 
CCMS transfers should be planned and set-up two to three working days prior to the actual 
transfer date to address outliers and ensure a smooth transfer. 
 
CCMS transfers can occur in the following scenarios for which the list is non-exhaustive:  
1. An individual is enrolled in CCMS with a service provider and wishes to move to another 
region to improve ATD program outcomes. For example, moving to a city where they 
have deeper ties to the community (family, close friend, etc.). The goal in this scenario 
is to improve ATD program outcomes and better prepare the participant for success 
during the programs de-escalation stage. 
2. An individual is in detention, is not enrolled in the ATD program, has few or no ties to 
the community in their originating region, but has strong ties in another region where the 
CCMS program is available. 
3. An individual is in detention, is not enrolled in the ATD program, and the CBSA regional 
boundary does not align with the service provider regional boundary (e.g. Hamilton is in 
Greater Toronto Area Region for the CBSA but in Southern Ontario Region for the 
service provider). 
4. An individual is in detention, is not enrolled in the ATD program, and when no sufficient 
high intervention programming is available in the originating region. For example, a 
situation where no beds are available in the originating region where the case is, but are 
available in another. 
 
It is important to note that all costs associated with CCMS transfers are the responsibility of the 
two regions involved. Costs incurred by the regions may include, but are not limited to: fleet 
vehicle use and gasoline, bus/train/airplane tickets for the individual being transferred, officer 
salary and any overtime incurred, and meal per diems for longer escorted transfers. Please 
refer to the CCMS Regional Transfer Guidelines for additional details.  
 
 
12.5.4. Assessment by the CCMS service provider  
Upon receipt of a referral, the CCMS service provider performs an initial review of the information 
and contacts the CLO with a plan to complete the eligibility assessment. When necessary, the 


===== PAGE 21 =====
21  
  
CLO assists the CCMS service provider in gathering additional information that may be required 
in setting up interviews with the individual.  
  
The CCMS service provider interviews the individual in person or remotely, if necessary, using 
the services of an interpreter, as required. The service provider provides the results of the 
eligibility assessment to the CLO as soon as it is completed and within the timelines outlined in 
the CCMS service providers statement of work.  
  
The completed assessment is reviewed by the CLO and can be used in subsequent detention 
reviews by the Hearings Officer, as appropriate. The eligibility assessment provides the CBSA 
with sufficient information related to a proposed release plan for presentation to the IRB.  
  
12.5.5. CCMS Use of Interpreters  
The CBSA has access to interpreters through a list of accredited and security cleared 
interpreters maintained by IRCC.  
CCMS service providers can access (and use) the interpreters list to assist in service delivery 
during the following phases:  
1. Referral and Assessment: the service provider is required, at the request of the CBSA 
and/or the IRB to assess individuals for ATD CCMS enrolment. This will include an 
interview, which may be undertaken in person or via telephone.  
2. Enrolment: once released by the IRB, the service provider will meet with the individual 
to enrol them in ATD CCMS Program. This includes discussing the terms and 
conditions of release and any service provider-related rules for programming. 
3. Case Management: the service provider is required to meet with the individual while 
they are released into the community to discuss programming, verify attendance, etc.  
 
12.5.6. Enrolment with the CCMS service provider  
Once enrolment with a CCMS service provider has been imposed as a condition of release by 
the CBSA or the IRB, the CLO makes arrangements with the CCMS service provider to enrol 
the individual. In most cases, the individual is released from the detention facility with a direction 
to report to the CCMS service provider at a scheduled time.  
  
High-risk individuals may be transported to the CCMS service provider office or residential facility 
by the CBSA or contracted guard service for enrolment, when deemed necessary. The CBSA or 
the contracted guard service can only transport individuals who have their release conditions 
explicitly worded that release is contingent upon enrolment.  
  
At the enrolment appointment, the CCMS case worker reviews the release conditions imposed 
and the particulars of the individual’s case to develop an appropriate program of reporting and 
community services that collectively mitigates risk factors present. They further explain what is 
required of the individual to participate in the CCMS program. The specific services and 


===== PAGE 22 =====
22  
  
programs that the individual is subject to, as part of their participation in the CCMS program, are 
documented within the Agreement of Supervision or the Supervision Contract initiated between 
the CCMS service provider and the individual. This document (BSF802) is sent to the CLO using 
Canada Post Connect and is to be placed on the individual’s file, in accordance with the CCMS 
statement of work. All relevant information is put into the NCMS. Within seven business days, 
the CLO will upload the ATD forms into GCMS as per the ATD Form Upload Procedures.  
  
12.5.7. Monitoring and enforcement by CCMS service provider and CBSA  
Once the individual has been enrolled into the CCMS program, the CCMS service provider has 
regular and ongoing interactions with the individual to ensure that the individual is abiding by the 
requirements of the program and their release conditions. Over the course of their participation 
in the program, the CCMS service provider, in accordance with the parameters of their statement 
of work, provides the CLO with any new information received from the individual that may be of 
interest to the CBSA in the ongoing administration of the program.  
  
On a regular schedule, the CCMS service provider will review the services the individual is 
enrolled in and provide the CLO with a recommendation to maintain the current services or 
modify them, in accordance with the CCMS service providers statement of work. In general, 
individuals enrolled in the CCMS program are expected to gradually require less support from 
the CCMS service provider, to the point where they can remain stable in the community without 
support from the CCMS service provider.  
  
If the CCMS service provider becomes aware that the individual is not abiding by the 
requirements of the CCMS program or other conditions of their release, the CCMS service 
provider must contact the CLO with the details. The CLO, in conjunction with the service 
provider, will have a discussion to determine the appropriate response. Depending on the nature 
and severity of the violation, the history of the individual and the risk level of the individual, more 
restrictive conditions may be imposed, withdrawal of supervision may be undertaken, and the 
case may be referred for investigation and further enforcement action.  
  
 
12.6. Electronic monitoring  
The National Electronic Monitoring Program (NEMP) is an ATD option and is currently operated 
through a partnership with Correctional Service Canada (CSC). A Memorandum of 
Understanding with CSC facilitates the provision of monitoring services, software profile 
management and inventory services.   
  
EM involves attaching a bracelet-type device to an individual’s ankle which allows continuous 
monitoring of the individual’s location when released in the community. The bracelet is securely 
attached and should only be removed in cases of medical necessity, unless otherwise directed 
by the CBSA or IRB.  
 


===== PAGE 23 =====
23  
  
EM is intended to be used in conjunction with CCMS, a deposit or guarantee, or both for 
individuals who present a high risk if released into the community, but whose predicted length of 
detention favours release. Individuals on EM usually have restrictions on places and times that 
they can be in the community. Compliance with these conditions is monitored at all times by staff 
in the National Monitoring Centre, operated by CSC. Any violation of EM conditions is reported 
immediately to the CBSA for review and action, as required.  
  
12.6.1. Enrolment  
Once an individual has an EM condition imposed by the IRB or CBSA, the enrolment process is 
initiated by regional CBSA staff. EM enrolment is a two-step process: installation of the ankle 
monitor on the individual and installation of the Radio Frequency (RF) modem in the individual’s 
residence. The installation of the EM monitoring device takes approximately 60 minutes and is 
done by a CBSA inland enforcement officer.  
  
Before the individual’s release from detention, the officer performs an assessment of the 
proposed residence and tests the functioning of the RF unit and the ankle monitor at the 
proposed residence by verifying the operation of the units with the CSC National Monitoring 
Centre. After verifying the equipment is functioning correctly, officers explain to the individual the 
terms and conditions of their participation in the NEMP and installs the ankle monitor. The officer 
reviews and shares a copy of the NEMP Client Handbook, which has their EM assigned client 
number listed on the cover page. The officer should also provide the client with a copy of the 
NEMP – Charging Instructions document.  
  
Enrolment in the NEMP program is undertaken in English and French only, so an interpreter may 
be necessary to assist the individual in following enrolment instructions.  
  
When an individual is successfully enrolled, they are provided with detailed written instructions 
on how to remain compliant with NEMP requirements and the particular conditions associated 
with their participation on the program. They are also provided with a handbook that provides 
tips, troubleshooting and contact information for assistance.  
  
12.6.2. Monitoring and enforcement  
Individuals on EM are monitored by the CSC National Monitoring Centre, in conjunction with the 
CBSA. Any breach or non-compliance is referred to the region for immediate action. All functions 
related to monitoring and enforcement are undertaken in accordance with NEMP policies and 
guidelines and are governed by the established Memorandum of Understanding between both 
departments.  
  


===== PAGE 24 =====
24  
  
13. Roles and responsibilities  
13.1. Community liaison officer  
The role of the CLO  is to provide a centralized approach for the ATD program. All CBSA regions 
have dedicated CLOs to ensure the effective and ongoing use of ATDs, in accordance with 
program objectives, national policies and guidelines. The CLO is the subject matter expert in all 
regions for ATDs and are primarily responsible for the assessment, referral and case 
management of ATD individuals. . While the CLO is not the primary file holder for specific cases, 
they must be made aware of all new detention cases. They may be informed about detainees 
through inclusion on arrest and detention emails, and may review the Notice of Arrest and 
Detention, or where applicable, converse with the arresting officer to discuss which ATD options 
are suitable based on the individual’s immigration history, ability to acquire travel documents, 
ties to Canada, period of time since last incident with the CBSA or the criminal justice system 
and vulnerabilities.  
 
It is the CLO’s responsibility to conduct an initial assessment to determine if the individual should 
be recommended for an ATD, in accordance with case management risk mitigation strategies 
and ATD program objectives. The assessment process by the CLO should include an interview 
with the detainee in order to determine ATD eligibility. All individuals for whom detention was 
ordered and continued past the seven day detention review will be assigned for an ATD 
assessment by the CLO to ensure all individuals have an ATD assessment prior to the 30-day 
detention review. The CLO is the sole point of contact in the region for the CCMS service 
provider. On a monthly basis, the CLO will review the individuals’ file to determine if they should 
be considered for de-escalation and/or graduation from the CCMS program, and recommend 
amended conditions for consideration by the IRB.  
 
At the three (3) month mark of EM participation OR as new information comes to light that 
diminishes the need1 for EM use, the CLO must initiate a case review for EM participants. This 
can be done alone or with the assistance of the regional EM response unit.  
 If the case was not recommended for de-escalation by the CLO at the three (3) month 
mark, the CLO is to review the case every thirty (30) days thereafter or as new 
information becomes available that diminishes the need for EM use.  
 The CLO’s are regional program officers with the delegated authorities under the IRPA to make 
decisions. Despite this authority, they are not expected to make decisions on detention, release 
or the imposition of conditions. Rather, they provide functional advice and guidance, as required, 
on the imposition of ATD condition to Inland Enforcement Officers, Border Services Officers and 
Hearings Officers in the management of their cases and the execution of their work. The CLO 
may, in conjunction with Inland Enforcement Officers and CCMS service providers, monitor 
individuals released into the community to assess their continued compliance with the ATD 
Program.  
  
                                            
1 Examples of information include but are not limited to: solidified travel documents; new family and/or kin has 
come forward to vouch for the participant; a history of compliance with the program. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
25  
  
 
13.2. CSC National Monitoring Centre  
The CSC National Monitoring Centre monitors the status of individuals enrolled in EM 24 hours 
per day and seven days per week and immediately notifies the CBSA of any violations of EM 
conditions. The CSC National Monitoring Centre also confirms the successful installation and 
application of EM equipment during enrolment and provides technical support to CBSA officers 
responsible for managing individuals on EM.  
  
13.3. CCMS service provider  
The CCMS service provider writes an eligibility assessment for individuals referred to them that 
describes the services and support available that are expected to mitigate and manage the 
individual’s risk in the community. Once the individual is enrolled in CCMS programming, the 
CCMS service provider monitors the individual and provides case management services. 
Information regarding changes in circumstances and violations is reported to the CLO for review 
and action, if required.  
  
The CCMS service provider must ensure the necessary services and programs are available in 
the service locations listed in the statement of work and fulfill the reporting and administrative 
obligations outlined in the statement of work. The CCMS service provider must provide qualified, 
security-cleared staff to perform case management functions, as specified in the statement of 
work.  
  
14.0. Jurisprudence 
The CLO is required to write comprehensive notes to file based on the assessment they 
conduct, including a recommendation for an ATD if applicable, because these 
recommendations could be put forward by the Hearings Officers during a detention review 
before the IRB. 
The Federal Court in Mawut (Citation: 2021 FC 1155) stated the following: 
[35] As a practical matter, the Minister’s representative should review the file and start 
from the premise that disclosure is the rule and withholding information, the 
exception. As the Federal Court of Appeal noted in Brown, at paragraph 142, the duty 
to disclose “is not unlimited” and is “tempered by the requirement that the information 
be relevant.” Relevance should be assessed according to the principles set out 
above. An assessment of relevance, however, cannot be based on the Minister’s 
representative’s opinion as to what avenues the detainee’s counsel should pursue, or 
the idea that the evidence already disclosed is overwhelming with respect to a 
particular issue or sufficient to justify detention. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
26  
  
[36] Given the nature of detention reviews, the Minister’s duty to disclose is a 
continuing one. Therefore, as the situation evolves, the weight of each section 248 
factor may vary. Nevertheless, information should not be withheld simply because the 
Minister’s representative believes that information may only become relevant at a 
later stage. 
[37] Adherence to the foregoing principles should go a long way towards preventing 
disputes regarding the scope of disclosure. Should an issue nonetheless arise, it 
should be brought before the ID. 
It is important to note that the CBSA has the obligation to demonstrate the IRB Members 
that it is being diligent in considering ATDs for vulnerable individuals. The Federal Court in 
Lee (Citation: 2022 FC 383) stated the following:  
[68] As counsel for Ms. Lee properly emphasizes, there is a heightened obligation on 
the part of the ID to consider alternatives to detention for vulnerable persons such as 
persons with mental illness (a point I will return to below). Related to this is a heightened 
onus on the Minister to justify the detention of such persons, as reflected in paragraph 
3.1.15 of the Guideline. Consequently, as the Guideline also notes, a member 
should “actively question” the steps that the Minister has taken to make an alternative 
to detention available when the person concerned is a vulnerable person. I am not 
persuaded that the ID erred in failing to do this in the last detention review. That being 
said, there has now been a material change in circumstances with the March 14, 2022, 
Order of Justice Ahmed granting an interlocutory stay of Ms. Lee’s removal. Given this, 
I fully expect the question of whether the CBSA is being diligent in identifying and 
supporting alternatives to detention to be front and centre at the next detention review. 
It is noteworthy that the CBSA has a heightened obligation to consider ATDs when detention 
becomes lengthy. The Federal Court in Ahmed (Citation: 2015 FC 876) stated the following:  
[34] Nevertheless, given the finding that Mr. Ahmed’s detention is indefinite, both the 
Board and the Minister are under a heightened obligation to consider alternatives to 
detention, specifically release upon conditions. The National Parole Board previously 
determined that Mr. Ahmed could be released subject to stringent conditions. It is open 
to the Board to require a psychological assessment as a condition of release (Canada 
(Minister of Citizenship and Immigration) v Romans, 2005 FC 435 at para 74). Counsel 
for Mr. Ahmed informed the Court that she has initiated the process to update the 
Minister’s Danger Opinion. These are all considerations that should be at the forefront 
when Mr. Ahmed’s detention is next reviewed on July 24, 2015. 
It is important to note that ATDs need not be perfect. Rather, they need only be proportional 
to the individual’s risk profile. The Federal Court in Hamdan (Citation: 2019 FC 1129) stated 
the following:  


===== PAGE 27 =====
27  
  
[97] Some final comments are in order regarding the specifics of the 25 
conditions. First, there could of course have been more safeguards placed within them 
in a perfect world. But as pointed out above, perfection is not the standard to be 
attained in a reasonableness review, and thus alternatives to detention need not 
be perfect (Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) v Berisha, 2012 FC 
1100 at para 85). Rather, they need only be proportionate and attainable, which these 
conditions were. 
It is noteworthy that the “virtually eliminate” test is virtually impossible to meet and could 
prevent release whenever a detainee is a danger to the public. The Federal Court in Mawut 
(Citation: 2022 FC 415) stated the following:  
[35] I wish to add that in reaching this conclusion, I have not found it necessary to rely 
on the idea that the conditions of release must “virtually eliminate” any danger to the 
public posed by Mr. Mawut. The phrase “virtually eliminate” finds its origin in Canada 
(Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) v Lunyamila, 2016 FC 1199, [2017] 3 
FCR 428 [Lunyamila], and was mentioned in subsequent cases. It is not always easy 
to reduce a complex decision-making process to a few words. Taken too literally, the 
“virtually eliminate” test is virtually impossible to meet and could foreclose release 
whenever a detainee is a danger to the public. This, however, is not what is 
contemplated by section 58 of the Act and section 248 of the Regulations, nor by the 
decision of the Federal Court of Appeal in Brown. In the context of bail, which shares a 
preventive purpose with immigration detention, conditions must “minimize’ or 
“attenuate” risk and be “proportional to the risk”: R v Zora, 2020 SCC 14, at paragraphs 
84, 85 and 89. I also note that in Canada (Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness) 
v Ali, 2018 FC 552, at paragraph 47, a decision rendered after Lunyamila, the test in 
the context of immigration detention was described as “any conditions of release [must 
be] sufficiently robust to ensure that the general public will not be exposed to any 
material risk of harm”. Whatever the best manner to formulate the test, it was clearly 
not met in this case. The basic conditions imposed by the ID do not attenuate in any 
way, and are not proportional to the risk posed by Mr. Mawut. 
It is of paramount importance to note that EM only monitors an individual’s whereabouts, not 
his activities, who he talks to and what he says. Therefore, a human supervision component is 
vital. The Federal Court in Bruzzese (Citation: 2014 FC 230) stated the following:  
[78] Finally, I have also come to the conclusion that ID members could reasonably find 
that the GPS monitoring was not sufficient to overcome the shortcomings of the 
bondspersons offered by the Applicant. There is no doubt that such a device, in 
combination with appropriate bondspersons, can sometimes provide an acceptable 
alternative to detention. In the case at bar, however, there were good reasons to find that 
it would not be sufficient to offset the concerns with respect to danger to the public. First 
of all, Mr Bruzzese did not present the ID members with a comprehensive proposal 
whereby any risk of flight could allegedly be managed, as was done in Tursunbayev. It 
appears that the bracelet used by the proposed company could be cut with a simple pair 


===== PAGE 28 =====
28  
  
of scissors, that it might take six hours to notify the authorities should the system breaks 
down, and that the monitoring would discontinue should the monthly bill not be paid. 
Maybe more importantly, the system would only control Mr Bruzzese’s location, not his 
activities, who he talks to and what he says. The GPS, therefore, might conceivably be 
an alternative to detention as far as the flight risk is concerned, but it would not be sufficient 
to ensure that Mr Bruzzese is not involved in the criminal activities of the ‘Ndrangheta, 
either in Canada or abroad. 
 
15. Presenting the alternatives to detention assessment at 
detention reviews  
The results of an ATD eligibility assessment is used by Hearings Officers when making 
submissions to the IRB on the residual risk posed by an individual if released. This may include 
the assessment by the CCMS service provider, if enrolment in CCMS is being proposed. In 
general, Hearings Officers make submissions on whether the factors in paragraphs R248(a) to 
(d) weigh in favour of detention or release, taking into account the residual risk after the available 
ATDs are considered.  
  
See ENF 3 Admissibility Hearings and Detention Reviews for more information on the factors for 
consideration and procedures at detention reviews.  
  
If the CBSA has not referred the case to the CCMS service provider and does not intend to in 
the foreseeable future, the Hearings Officer should provide a brief explanation of that decision. 
If the IRB requests that the individual be referred to the CCMS service provider for eligibility 
assessment, the CLO must do so.  
  
When making submissions on the wording of the conditions for CCMS and EM, the Hearings 
Officer should propose language that allow the CCMS service provider and the CBSA the latitude 
necessary to manage the person effectively while released. The proposed wording of the 
conditions should authorize the CBSA to modify or cancel the conditions imposed by the IRB 
related to CCMS and EM.  
  
16. Privacy and information-sharing  
Information collected under the ATD Program can only be disclosed under the provisions of the 
Privacy Act. See CBSA guidelines of information-sharing for details. In general, collected 
information can be shared under paragraph 8(2)(a) of the Privacy Act if it is shared for a use 
consistent with the purpose it was collected for. Information related to alternatives to detention 
is collected for the purpose of administering and enforcing the IRPA.  
  
 


===== PAGE 29 =====
29  
  
16.1. Community case management and supervision Privacy Notice form  
The CBSA is authorized to share information necessary for the assessment and participation 
in CCMS with the CCMS service provider, without the consent of the individual, as prescribed 
in paragraph 8(2)(a) of the Privacy Act. However, the individual must be notified that their 
information is being shared. The CCMS Privacy Notice form (BSF803) notifies the individual 
that their information may be provided to the CCMS service provider to start the eligibility 
assessment process and as needed, if enrolled. The sharing and use of information must be 
conveyed to the individual by the CLO, using an interpreter, if required, before the individual’s 
information is shared outside the CBSA.  
The BSF803 form must be uploaded in accordance with section 8.5. – Documenting the 
Decision.  
 
16.2. Requesting sensitive information from the community case 
management and supervision service provider  
While enrolled in CCMS, individuals may provide sensitive information, such as health and 
mental health information, to the CCMS service provider. The CBSA does not have routine 
access to this information. The CLO can only request sensitive information from the CCMS 
service provider if it is required to protect the health or safety of the individual, CBSA staff or the 
public.  
  
All requests for information from the CCMS service provider must be submitted by the CLO. The 
CLO will ensure that the requested information meets the requirements of the above policy and 
other applicable policies, regulations and legislation.  
  
  
 
